\=== PAGE 1 ===  
J MOST  
  
\#N TOPICS OF  
  
ana "he a  
a Exposed  
  
National Testin  
  
Excellence In Assessment  
  
NE ioe = "3 i  
  
“@  
UESTION PAPER 2026  
  
\=== PAGE 2 ===  
FREE FOR ALL  
  
th | 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM  
SUNE'26 | ONLINE & OFFLINE  
  
SCAN QRTO  
REGISTER NOW  
  
REGISTER FOR FREE  
  
\=== PAGE 3 ===  
IMPORTANT TOPICS  
MAY - 2026  
  
op) INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND NEWS  
| 1. PM Modi Visit to 5 Nations ......ccccc eee eeseseeeeeesescssecseseseseessescssssssseseseseseeasenenesssseseseee 03  
Zz 2. UAE's Exit from OPEC and OPEC+.....ccccceecceseseeeeseeescscsescseseseseeesssseseseseaeeesenenseseees 10  
LL NATIONAL NEWS AND ISSUES  
\_— 3. NEET Paper Leak Controversy ....c.cccscsesssssssessesesesessesessenenencscsesesesneasareneencaesesnenensaeeneeenes 15  
  
7 4. Bhojshala— Kamal Maula Complex .......c.cscccssssesessssesesesseeeeeseseseseeseaeesseenencacessneneneaeeneenes 19  
O POLITY & GOVERNANCE  
  
5\. Increase in Supreme Court Judge Strength 0... cceeceeesseeseseseseseeeeeeeeeeeseseseseaeeeeseeeneees 23  
©O 6. Anti-Defection Law .0....cccccccecccscccesccessccssccessccssecessccssscesscessecesscessscesseessecessecesscesseessseessees 30  
ECONOMICS  
  
7\. India's Forex Stress & Call for Economic Austerity ....  
  
SUMMITS, REPORTS, INDICES  
  
8\. World Press Freedom Index 2026 .0....sesesscsssssesesesssseesssesseeeseseseseeneasseeneneesseseseeaeareneeneaees 39  
  
9\. LEADS 2025 Report... cccecesecssseesessesesessseseeseseseseeeneasenenenesesesesesaeasaneneneneaesesneeseeaeeneenee\! 45  
SPORTS, AWARDS & DAYS  
  
10\. National Technology Day 2026.0... eccceseseseeeeeeseseseesseseseseseeseseseesseseseseseeeetenesessesenenees 50  
  
11\. International Labour Day .0......ccccecceeeeseseseeeeeeseseseesaeseseseeeeesessesssseseseseeeeseeeseessesesenees 54  
  
12 Miscellaneous... ccsssessesesessesessseseessesesesecaseeeeesenescsesesesneaeeeseeneaeaesnseesaeseseeecaseneneneneeeeetee 58  
  
13\. ADLET Commer o..cccccc ccc cccesesecesecscscsesescsesesesesscscseesassesesesesesessesessesesesesseanenesesseeeeesees 75  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar  
JAIPUR- 302015 (M) 72400 60099  
  
©Law Prep Tutorial  
  
All rights reserved.  
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including  
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system. Any unauthorised use of reproduction of these  
materials shall attract all applicable civil and criminal law remedies.  
  
\=== PAGE 4 ===  
Important Note for  
the Readers  
  
How to use the magazine  
  
The magazine consists of topics that hold relevance and importance in relation to CLAT.  
  
Each topic has following parts:  
  
1,  
  
News: This section ensures that the readers know what part of the topic has made it  
  
to the headlines ofa newspaper  
  
Cliffs Notes : This section helps the reader to know the context of the topic.  
Explanation that will help the reader understand about the topic is the motive of this  
section of the magazine. Before cramming the facts and details about the topic it is  
  
essential that you understand the topic. A little detail has never hurt anybody.  
  
Skill up : This section contains those topics which are related to the main topic  
discussed throughout the page. A little information on the periphery helps you  
answer those questions that are not part of the daily news but have crawled into the  
exam paper to fetch you another mark. Topics that are on the side of the main news  
have often helped in gaining that last mark which eventually puts you into the final  
selection list of the CLAT.  
  
Practice Questions: This section has a set of questions to help you gauge your  
understanding of the topic. You should try and solve the questions once you have  
thoroughly done the topic. On some days, start with the questions to test yourself for  
that one situation in the CLAT when you know nothing about the topic, but you will  
have to guess the answers. Ona side note, some questions might come across to you  
  
as a surprise but then when has the CLAT main exam not thrown us off our seats\!  
  
Happy Learning\!  
  
\=== PAGE 5 ===  
"May 2026  
  
«', TOPIC  
’ in NEWS  
  
PM MODI  
VISIT TO  
5 NATIONS  
  
Why in News?  
PM Modi's Visit to UAE and Europe highlights Key Diplomatic and Strategic Significance across Multiple Partner Nations.  
  
Key Outcomes of UAE's Visit  
  
Energy & Strategic Petroleum Cooperation: MoU signed between Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited and Abu Dhabi  
National Oil Company for strategic collaboration.  
  
© Proposal to store up to 30 Million Barrels of ADNOC Crude Oil in India's Strategic Petroleum Reserves.  
  
o Discussions on storing Crude Oil in Fujairah as part of India's Overseas Strategic Reserve Framework.  
  
LPG Supply Security: Strategic collaboration agreement between Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Abu Dhabi National Oil  
Company.  
  
o Potential long— term LPG Sale Agreement between ADNOC Gas Limited and IOCL.  
  
Defence & Maritime Cooperation: Framework advanced for a Strategic Defence Partnership.  
  
o MoU between Cochin Shipyard Limited and Drydocks World to establish a Ship Repair Cluster at Vadinar.  
  
o Cooperation includes offshore fabrication under Maritime Development Fund Scheme.  
  
AI & Supercomputing: Term sheet signed for setting up 8 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters.  
  
o Partnership between Centre for Development of Advanced Computing and G42 under India's AI Mission.  
  
Investment Cooperation: Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and National Infrastructure and Investment Fund to explore  
investments up to US$1 Billion in India's Infrastructure Sector.  
  
India — UAE Bilateral Relations  
  
Trade e FY 2025 — 26: US$ 100 Billion  
o 3% Largest Trade Partner after China and US.  
o 2™ Largest Export Destination of India, after US.  
e 3" Largest Crude Oil Source.  
¢ 3" Largest Supplier of LNG & 2™ Largest Supplier of LPG.  
e UAE is Only Nation participating in India’s Strategic Reserve  
Programme.  
  
Comprehensive Economic  
Partnership Agreement  
  
NRI Remittances  
  
In 2022, India became 1“ Country with which UAE signed Comprehensive  
Economic Partnership Agreement  
  
UAE accounted for 18% of India's Remittance Flows.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 03  
  
\=== PAGE 6 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News \[— Tutorial\]  
Defence e Desert Cyclone (Military), Zayed Talwar (Naval) and Desert Eagle (Air  
Force)  
e India’s access to UAE’s Al Dhafra Air Base for Refuelling.  
Multilateral Cooperation e 12U2 (India — Israel - UAE — USA)  
e BRICS  
Cultural e MoU for Cooperation aimed at supporting of "Maritime Heritage  
  
Complex" at Lothal (Gujarat)  
e BAPS Hindu Temple: UAE’s 1\* Traditional Hindu Stone Temple located  
  
in Abu Dhabi.  
  
e Indian Nationals form Largest Expatriate Community within UAE.  
  
United Arab Emirates  
  
e Federal, Elective Monarchy composed of 7°  
Emirates  
e Shares Land Borders with Oman and Saudi Arabia.  
o Maritime Borders in Persian Gulf with Qatar  
and Iran & with Oman in Gulf of Oman.  
e President: Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan  
  
e Prime Minister: Mohammed bin Rashid Al  
Maktoum  
  
© Currency: Dirham  
Capital: Abu Dhabi  
  
The Kafala System  
  
The Kafala system, meaning  
“sponsorship" in Arabic, is used in Gulf  
countries like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,  
Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, and the UAE.  
  
Kafala regulates the relationship  
between employers and migrant  
workers, requiring foreign workers to  
  
have an in-country sponsor, typically their  
employer.  
  
This sponsor controls the worker's visa |  
and legal status. Workers cannot change  
  
jobs or leave the country without the  
  
sponsor's permission, leading to  
  
potential exploitation, non-payment of  
  
wages, poor working conditions, and  
  
restricted freedom of movement.  
  
Extra Shorts  
  
World's Largest Airport Terminal: Al Maktoum International Airport (Jebel Ali, Dubai, UAE).  
Arab World's 1" Nuclear Power Plant: Barakah Nuclear Power Plant  
BAPS Hindu Temple: I" Hindu Stone Temple Abu Dhabi (UAE)  
Awarded Highest Civilian Award of UAE called 'Order of Zayed’ in 2019.  
  
PM Modi Visit to Norway  
  
PM Modi undertook 1“ Bilateral Visit by an Indian PM to Norway (Capital: Oslo  
  
PM: Jonas Gahr Store) in 43 Years.  
  
PM Modi participated in 3" India — Nordic Summit held in Oslo (Norway) after  
  
1“in Stockholm (2018) and 2™ in Copenhagen (2022).  
  
e India and Norway upgraded ties to a Green Strategic Partnership, focusing  
on Clean Energy Transition, Climate Resilience, Blue Economy, Green  
  
Shipping.  
  
Norway  
  
|e Located on Scandinavian Peninsula  
  
e Famous for Fjords (Glacial Sea Inlets,  
  
e Not in EU, but part of Europeai  
Economic Area (EEA) and NATO  
  
e@ PM Modi awarded Norway's Highest Civilian Honour, Grand Cross of Royal Norwegian Order of Merit.  
  
¢ Norway formally joined India's Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 04  
  
\=== PAGE 7 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
India and Italy (Capital: Rome | PM: Giorgia Meloni) upgraded bilateral relations to a Special Strategic Partnership.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
Nordic Countries India — Norway Relations  
Group of Countries in Northern Europe. ; : India— EFTA TEPA signed (2024).  
Norwegian Sovereign Wealth Fund  
(GPFG): \~USD 28 billion invested in India.  
India's Himadri Station (Svalbard) in  
  
Core Nordic Countries: Denmark, Finland,  
Iceland (Least Populous), Norway, Sweden  
(Most Populous)  
  
Autonomous Territories: Faroe Islands Norway (2008).  
(Denmark), Greenland (Denmark), Aland India is an Arctic Council Observer (since  
Islands (Finland) 2013).  
  
PM Modi Visit to Italy  
  
Key Outcomes  
India and Italy committed to increasing bilateral trade to €20 billion by 2029.  
  
Both Nations committed support for India — Middle East — Europe Economic Corridor (IMEEC) which aims to  
improve Trade Connectivity, Logistics, Energy and Digital Links between Asia and Europe.  
  
Italy Calls India' Programme: To connect Indian Students studying in Italy with Internships, Skill Development and  
Corporate Employment Opportunities.  
  
Year 2027 declared as 'Year of Culture and Tourism between India and Italy' to commemorate 80 years o  
diplomatic relations.  
  
PM Modi was conferred Agricola Medal by Food and Agriculture Organization.  
  
India — Italy Ties  
  
Italy is India's 4" Largest Trading Partner in EU.  
  
India — Italy — Japan Trilateral (2021): Focuses on Indo — Pacific  
Security, Stability, Multilateral Cooperation.  
  
o It became India's 2" Indo — Pacific Trilateral involving a  
  
Joint Strategic Action Plan (2025 — 29): Roadmap covering  
Defence, Economy, Connectivity, Science & Innovation,  
  
Food and Agriculture Organization  
  
|e Founded: 16 October 1945  
  
¢ Specialized Agency of UN.  
  
e Leading Global Body for Hunger  
Eradication and Food Security.  
  
e Members: 195 Countries (194 + EU)  
  
e HQ: Rome, Italy  
  
European Country after India—France—Australia.  
  
Migration, Space, Energy Transition.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
05  
  
\=== PAGE 8 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News — Tutorial =  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Italy joined International Solar Alliance, Global Biofuel Alliance, IMEEC Initiative.  
  
Indian Diaspora in Italy: Largest Indian Community in European Union.  
  
Colosseum  
  
Located in Rome, Italy  
  
Originally called Flavian Amphitheatre.  
Rang Ghar  
e Knownas Colosseum of the East.  
© One of Asia's Oldest Surviving  
Amphitheatres.  
e Built By: Ahoms  
¢ Constructed by Swargadeo Rudra Singha  
  
Built under Flavian dynasty Emperor Vespasian and Completed  
by Titus.  
  
Constructed between 70—80 AD.  
  
Largest Ancient Amphitheatre ever built and Largest Standing  
Amphitheatre in the world.  
  
Declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site (1980) included among  
New Seven Wonders of the World (2007).  
  
and rebuilt by Swargadeo Pramatta Singha.  
Located in Sivasagar, Assam.  
  
India-Middle East-Europe  
Economic Corridor (IMEC)  
  
TORKIYE  
  
Piraeus Ove, Halfa  
\> i ISRAEL  
  
Riyadh  
Jebel Ali  
  
Al-Haditha  
  
o  
SAUDI  
ARABIA  
  
Haradh  
  
Al Ghuwaifat  
  
\[India — Netherlands Strategic Partnership  
  
PM Modi visited Netherlands (Capital: Amsterdam | PM: Rob Jetten | Rotterdam: Largest Port in Europe).  
  
Anaimangalam Copper Plates (Leiden Plates) returned by Netherlands to India.  
  
Afsluitdijk Dam visited by PM Modi to strengthen India — Netherlands Cooperation in Water Management, Climate Resilience  
and Sustainable Infrastructure.  
  
Netherlands serves as India's Gateway to Europe and ranks among Country's Top 4 Sources of FDI.  
Semiconductor Cooperation: MoU between Tata Electronics and ASML.  
  
o Supports India's Semiconductor Plant in Dholera (Gujarat)  
  
“Brain Bridge” Initiative: Dutch Universities partnered with Indian Institutions such as IIT Delhi and IISc for  
Semiconductor Research, Talent Development, Advanced Technology Collaboration.  
  
Cultural Diplomacy: Leiden University restituted 11" Century Chola Copper Plates to India.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 06  
  
\=== PAGE 9 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
India and Sweden elevated bilateral ties to Strategic Partnership  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Anaimangalam Copper Plates  
  
\_ Plates were acquired around 1700 CE by Dutch missionary Florentius Camper during rule of Dutch East India Company |  
\_ over Coromandel Coast.  
  
e — 11" Century Royal Charters commissioned by Rajaraja Chola I and later engraved during reign of Rajendra Chola.  
¢ = Collection consists of 21 Large and 3 Smaller Copper Sheets.  
o Larger Plates are bound by a Bronze Loop displaying Chola Emblem: Tiger (Cholas), Fish (Pandyas), Bow  
(Cheras).  
o. Smaller Sheets belong to Kulottunga Chola 1.  
e Inscriptions record Land and Revenue grants made to Chulamanivarma Vihara Buddhist Monastery (Nagapattinam).  
o Monastery was built by Sri Mara Vijayotunga Varman of Srivijaya Kingdom (Indonesia).  
e Inscriptions are written in Tamil (Chola Genealogy) and Sanskrit (Administrative and Revenue Details).  
o Sanskrit sections contain Invocations and Chola Genealogy.  
  
eo Tamil sections provide Administrative and Revenue Details.  
  
Afsluitdijk Dam Kalpasar Project  
  
e 32 km long Barrier Dam and Causeway : Proposed Mega Water — Management and.  
located in Netherlands. Freshwater Storage Project in Gujarat.  
  
. Will create World's Largest Freshwater Reservoir.  
e Protects Large Low — Lying Areas of | .  
Aim: To construct a Massive Dam across Gulf o,  
  
Netherlands from flooding caused by North  
  
Khambhat.  
Sea. Objective: Freshwater Storage, Flood Control,  
e Transformed Saline Zuiderzee Inlet into Climate Resilience, Irrigation Support an  
Freshwater LJsselmeer Lake. Regional Development.  
  
India — Sweden Upgrade Ties to Strategic Partnership  
  
during official visit of PM Modi to Sweden (Capital: Stockholm | PM: Extra Shots  
UlfKristersson). -e India and Sweden launched Leadershi  
  
Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT) at Ul  
Climate Action Summit in 2019.  
  
PM Modi received Sweden's Royal Order of Polar Star and  
  
Commander Grand Cross, the Highest Recognition and Honour  
  
that can be conferred upon a Head of Government. o LeadIT promotes Low — Carbo  
  
. . ‘ Industrial Transition and Sustainabl.  
o This marks PM Modi's 31“ Global Honour.  
  
Manufacturing Practices.  
  
Both Nations adopted India — Sweden Joint Action Plan 2026 —  
2030 which lays out Roadmap for Cooperation.  
  
India and Sweden endorsed joint development of India— Sweden Technology and Artificial Intelligence Corridor (SITAC).  
  
Both Nations agreed to establish an India - Sweden SME and Start — up Platform to support Innovation — driven  
Entrepreneurship.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 07  
  
\=== PAGE 10 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
PM Modi's visit to Norway was the first bilateral visit by an Indian Prime Minister in how many years?  
(a) 25 years (b) 33 years (c) 43 years (d) 50 years  
  
India and Norway upgraded their bilateral ties to which kind of partnership during PM Modi's visit?  
(a) Comprehensive Economic Partnership (b) Green Strategic Partnership  
(c) Special Strategic Partnership (d) Blue Economy Partnership  
  
The 3rd India—Nordic Summit was held in which city?  
(a) Stockholm (b) Helsinki (c) Copenhagen (d) Oslo  
  
India's Arctic research station 'Himadri' is located in which Norwegian territory?  
(a) Bergen (b) Tromso (c) Svalbard (d) Lofoten Islands  
  
Which MoU was signed between India and UAE regarding strategic petroleum cooperation?  
(a) ONGC and ADNOC MoU for refinery expansion  
  
(b) Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Ltd and ADNOC for strategic collaboration  
  
(c) BPCL and ADNOC for crude supply  
  
(d) GAIL and ADNOC for natural gas storage  
  
India proposed to store how many barrels of ADNOC crude oil in its Strategic Petroleum Reserves?  
(a) 10 million barrels (b) 20 million barrels  
(c) 30 million barrels (d) 50 million barrels  
  
UAE's bilateral trade with India in FY 2025-26 stands at approximately:  
(a) US$ 50 Billion (b) US$ 75 Billion  
(c) US$ 100 Billion (d) US$ 120 Billion  
  
Which AI & Supercomputing agreement was signed between C-DAC and G42 during PM Modi's UAE visit?  
(a) 4 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters (b) 6 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters  
(c) 8 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters (d) 12 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters  
  
In 2022, UAE became the first country with which India signed which agreement?  
(a) Free Trade Agreement (FTA) (b) Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA)  
(c) Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) (d) Strategic Trade Agreement (STA)  
  
PM Modi was conferred the Agricola Medal by FAO. Georgius Agricola is known as the Father of:  
(a) Agriculture (b) Mineralogy (c) Botany (d) Economics  
  
India and Italy upgraded their bilateral relations to which level during PM Modi's visit?  
(a) Comprehensive Economic Partnership (b) Enhanced Defence Partnership  
(c) Special Strategic Partnership (d) Full Diplomatic Union  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 08  
  
\=== PAGE 11 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
12\.  
  
14\.  
  
19\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Which corridor, supported by both India and Italy, aims to connect Asia and Europe through improved trade and  
logistics?  
  
(a) Trans-Caspian Trade Route  
  
(b) India—Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor (IMEEC)  
  
(c) Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)  
  
(d) INSTC Corridor  
  
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), headquartered in Rome, was founded on:  
(a) 16 October 1945 (b) 24 October 1945 (c) 1 January 1948 (d) 10 December 1948  
  
An MoU was signed between Tata Electronics and which Dutch company to support India's semiconductor plant in  
Dholera (Gujarat)?  
(a) Philips (b) NXP Semiconductors (c) ASML (d) IMEC  
  
The Anaimangalam Copper Plates (Leiden Plates) returned to India by Netherlands were originally commissioned by:  
(a) Vikramaditya II (b) Pulakesi II (c) Rajaraja Chola I (d) Krishnadevaraya  
  
The Afsluitdijk Dam in Netherlands transformed the Zuiderzee Inlet into which freshwater lake?  
(a) Lake Markermeer (b) LJsselmeer Lake (c) Grevelingenmeer (d) Veluwe Lake  
  
Netherlands ranks among India's top sources of FDI and serves as India's:  
(a) Largest trade partner in EU (b) Gateway to Europe  
(c) Primary defence supplier in Europe (d) Largest source of remittances in Europe  
  
What honour did PM Modi receive from Sweden during his official visit?  
(a) Order of the Seraphim  
  
(b) Order of Vasa  
  
(c) Royal Order of Polar Star and Commander Grand Cross  
  
(d) King's Medal of Merit  
  
India and Sweden jointly launched which initiative at the UN Climate Action Summit in 2019?  
(a) Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI)  
  
(b) Leadership Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT)  
  
(c) International Solar Alliance (ISA)  
  
(d) Global Biofuel Alliance (GBA)  
  
India and Sweden endorsed the joint development of which technology corridor during PM Modi's Sweden visit?  
(a) India-Sweden Digital Economy Bridge (SDEB)  
  
(b) India-Sweden Green Tech Corridor (SGTC)  
  
(c) India-Sweden Technology and Artificial Intelligence Corridor (SITAC)  
  
(d) India—Sweden Smart Manufacturing Corridor (SSMC)  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 09  
  
\=== PAGE 12 ===  
"May 2026  
  
FROM MAY 1  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
UAE's EXIT FROM  
OPEC AND OPEC+  
  
Why in News?  
United Arab Emirates (Joined in 1967) announced Exit from Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and OPEC+  
Alliance, effective 01 May 2026.  
Exit of United Arab Emirates seen as Major Geopolitical Shift, potentially Weakening OPEC Influence over Global Oil  
Market.  
  
66  
  
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries operates as a Regulatory Authority for  
International Energy Market by managing Supply Levels. Much like a financial institution, OPEC implements  
Production Quotas to prevent Extreme Fluctuations in Cost of Crude Oil. These strategic limits protect against  
Market Oversupply, ensuring that Prices Remain Sustainable for Both Consumers and Exporting Nations. By  
adjusting output in response to Global Demand, OPEC safeguards Economic Stability of its members who  
depend on Petroleum Revenue. Ultimately, this coordinated approach serves to Minimise Volatility and  
Maintain a Reliable Balance within Global Economy.  
  
Cliffs Notes /  
  
(OPEC)  
  
e Established in 1960 at Baghdad Conference by Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, OPEC's 2025 crude production (thousand barres/day)  
  
Saudi Arabia, Venezuela. SAUDIARABIA 9AM (34.34%)  
e Mandate: To protect Oil Exporters' Interests by Coordinating 0d TN (14.54%)  
  
Production Policies ensuring Stable Supply and Fair Returns for RN IE EY (11.83%)  
  
Member Nations. ne EK 11.39%  
  
2.475 TD)  
  
e Members: 11 cen BEESON (5.48%)  
  
o Algeria, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Iran, Iraq, uBvA ERE\] (4.70%)  
  
Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela. VENEZUELA - EXT) (3.40%)  
  
e HQ: Vienna (Austria)  
  
GABON -§ 227 |(0.82%) Pi  
EQ.GUNEA-\] 53 |(0.19%)  
  
Peak Oil Theory  
Proposed by M. King Hubbert.  
  
Suggests that Oil Production follows a Bell — shaped Curve,  
  
reaching a Maximum Level before entering Irreversible Decline.  
  
Theory implies that once Peak Production is reached, Supply  
  
Shortages may lead to Rising Prices and Economic Challenges.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 10  
  
\=== PAGE 13 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Impact of UAE's Exit ' Habshan — Fujairah Pipeline  
\-e@ Crude Oil Pipeline in UAE.  
¢ Connects Inland Oil Fields of  
Habshan to port of Fujairah on  
Gulfof Oman.  
¢ = Bypasses Strait of Hormuz  
  
Weakening of OPEC's Influence: UAE is a Major Oil Producer (3" Largest). :  
Its exit Reduces Collective Discipline Ability to control Global Oil Prices.  
  
Increased Market Volatility: Independent Production Strategies may lead to |  
Fluctuating Oil Supply and Greater Price Volatility. :  
  
Shift in Global Energy Geopolitics: Signals Fragmentation within Oi  
Alliances growing competition among producers. i  
  
Reasons Behind UAE's Exit  
\= Production Quota Constraints: OPEC Quotas limited UAE's ability to fully utilise its expanding oil capacity.  
o UAEaims to reach\~5 million barrels/day by 2027.  
o UAE holds World's 6" Largest Oil Reserves.  
  
e = Approaching Peak Demand Phase: UAE predicts Imminent Peak in Global Oil Demand, foresees Gradual .  
Decline in Consumption and Market Value. :  
  
e Strategic Energy Shift: Focus on Maximising Short — term Oil Revenues and preparing for Long — term Energy  
Transition to Renewables.  
  
e = National Interest & Flexibility: UAE seeks Strong Oil Revenues to fund AI and Data Centre growth, driving  
transition toward Diversified Future Economy.  
  
e = Internal Differences within OPEC: Long—standing Tensions with Saudi Arabia over Production Policy.  
  
o UAE- Saudi Arabia Economic and Political Rivalry intensifies amid growing Regional Competition over  
Influence and Strategic Interests. :  
  
e =Habshan — Fujairah Pipeline boosts UAE Export Flexibility, enables Higher Output amid Strait of Hormuz  
Disruption Risks.  
  
Impact on India d d  
India stands to gain from Decreased Oil Prices, which would Lower National Cru e Conten ers  
  
Suppliers’ share in India’s  
crude imports (%)  
  
0s I 372  
  
SaudiArabia 13.2 \[10.4  
  
Iraq 17.9 Gio.  
  
Import Costs and mitigate Inflationary Pressures.  
  
Shift allows for Direct Bilateral Negotiations and increased Supply Flexibility  
Outside of Traditional Cartel Restrictions. i  
  
o Crucially, this geopolitical change supports India's De — Dollarisation  
  
Strategy by encouraging Energy Settlements in Rupees.  
Heightened Market Volatility could complicate Long — Term Energy Budgetin,  
  
pecs O About Gulf Cooperation UAE 77 lea  
Formed in 2016. : Council (GCC) (savel arabia Us i 36 7 3  
Alliance between OPEC AEERESES Riyadh in 1981. r | . | :  
and Major 11 Non — 4(VEIees Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, United Arab Africa 7 12.2  
OPEC Producers. : Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, and Oman Others | 10 | 6 7  
o. Azerbaijan, | | GS QIGENNZH To achieve unity among its  
Bahrain, Brazil, Brunei members based on their common objectives  
  
, a and their similar political and cultural  
Kazakhstan, Malaysia, identities.  
Mexico, Oman, Russia,  
South Sudan, Sudan. Skill - Up: OAPEC, Mumbai High, Trombay, ONCG, IPI Pipeline  
P 2 ME ip  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ i  
  
\=== PAGE 14 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
ORGANIZATION OF THE PETROLEUM @  
  
Formation and initial growth, in 1960 by Iran Ve  
emphasis on sovereignty  
  
over natural resources. \~\~  
® September 1960 rN  
  
Formation Ecuador, nM 2  
® 1961 Woined in 1973, g Y  
  
Suspended in 1992  
Qatar joined OPEC. FRejoined in 200 ii  
  
Algeria q }-  
Indonesia & Libya joined OPEC. .  
  
» snezuelal  
P 1967 ane noe | nezuela  
International ¥  
  
® 1969 Development (OFID),  
Algeria joined OPEC. established in 1976,  
provides financial aid  
  
1970s to developing  
  
countries for  
Control of domestic infrastructure,  
petroleum industries, PEQMeyeamelare|  
establishment of OPEC Biel ilele-i elt) (tac  
Fund for International  
  
| ExportinG Countries @I@  
Established = — cI — at the To Coordinate and unify  
  
Baghdad \_ petroleum policies to secure  
  
—=  
nezuela Iraq SaudiArabia Kuwait Conference prices, supply, and returns.  
  
\-— \~  
  
H € Qatar  
  
Secretariat loined in 196}  
  
j965-Present) + Terminafed  
nna, Austri ‘i  
ence, Mai, membershipimeoia:  
  
™ UAE  
Joined in 1967  
  
Development (1976). S 3 a r OPEC Plus r  
4 1971 OPEC Plus Members Objective  
Respond to falling oil prices  
Nigeria joined OPEC  
b or . OPEC 4 Non-OPEC | due to increased U.S. shale  
OPEC nd Members Members oil output  
Ecuador joined OPEC Envi i t Algeria, Azerbaijan,  
) 1975 nvironmen Congo, Bahrain, Key Member  
Gabon joined OPEC. Advocacy Equatorial Brunei, Russia (world’s 3rd-largest  
me pramotes i ibl Guinea, Kazakhstan, | oil producer in 2022 with  
1980s Regard er ef Gabon, Iran, Malaysia, 10.3 million b/d).  
environmental stewardship. Iraq, Kuwait, Mexico, J OS  
Market Crash Recovery, \* Supports sustainable development Libya, Oman, OPEC+ pumps  
introduction of group alongside fossil fuel usage. Nigeria, Russia, around 40% of  
production adjustment and = Saudi South Sudan. 40% the world's  
Commitment :  
Reference Basket for pricing. Arabia, Sudan crude oil.  
All Member Countries are Venezuela a  
signatories to the UNFCCC  
1990s  
  
Market volatility, Southeast  
  
increased globalization and  
producer-consumer dialogue. South Africa  
  
P 1992 93:28 4  
Ecuador suspended membership Australia  
  
P January 1995 Total  
Gabon terminated membership. Exports  
  
$70.13B  
| 2000s |  
  
Market volatility, financial Singapore  
crisis response, adoption of $5.7B  
  
spat Teme atedy (2005). Petroleum Exports (Apr-Jan 2024)  
  
Asian economic downturn, India's Petroleum Exports and Crude Oil Imports  
  
\* Despite sanctions, Russia remained the  
dominant supplier to India.  
  
Imports  
  
Saudi Arabia i $84.88B  
  
20.85% $17.78  
lraq 27.56%  
$23.48  
  
Crude Oil Imports (Apr-Jan 2024)  
  
OG) fly | 2010s | July2016 2017. 2018 \~— 2019 2020 2020 2025  
Ecuador Indonesia Market stability Gabon Equatorial \~Congo Qatar Historic production Ecuador Brazil  
rejoined suspendedits challenges, Paris rejoined Guinea joined terminated adjustmentsto withdrew —\_Joined  
  
OPEC. membership. Agreement participation, OPEC. joined. OPEC. its stabilize the | membership. OPEC.  
  
Declaration of membership Market, even in  
  
Cooperation (2016).  
  
COVID-19.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 6009  
  
9 12  
  
\=== PAGE 15 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
UAE joined the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in which year?  
(a) 1960 (b) 1967 (c) 1973 (d) 1980  
  
UAE announced its exit from OPEC and OPEC+, effective from which date?  
(a) 01 January 2026 (b) 01 March 2026 (c) 01 May 2026 (d) 01 July 2026  
  
OPEC was established in which year and at which conference?  
(a) 1945, Geneva Conference (b) 1955, Bandung Conference  
  
(c) 1960, Baghdad Conference (d) 1965, Vienna Conference  
  
Which of the following was NOT a founding member of OPEC?  
(a) Iran (b) Iraq (c) UAE (d) Venezuela  
  
How many member countries does OPEC currently have (after UAE's exit)?  
(a)9 (b) 11 (c) 13 (d) 15  
  
Where is the headquarters of OPEC located?  
(a) Geneva, Switzerland (b) Brussels, Belgium (c) Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (d) Vienna, Austria  
  
OPEC+ was formed in which year?  
(a) 2010 (b) 2014 (c) 2016 (d) 2018  
  
How many Non-OPEC producers are part of the OPEC+ Alliance?  
  
(a)7 (b) 9 (c) 11 (d) 13  
UAE ranks as the world's largest holder of oil reserves.  
(a) 3rd (b) 4th (c) Sth (d) 6th  
  
UAE aims to reach a production target of approximately how many barrels per day by 2027?  
(a) 3 million barrels/day (b) 4 million barrels/day  
(c) 5 million barrels/day (d) 6 million barrels/day  
  
The Peak Oil Theory was proposed by which scientist?  
(a) Daniel Yergin (b) M. King Hubbert (c) Albert Bartlett (d) Colin Campbell  
  
According to the Peak Oil Theory, oil production follows which type of curve?  
(a) J-shaped curve (b) S-shaped (logistic) curve  
(c) Bell-shaped curve (d) Linear curve  
  
The Habshan-Fujairah Pipeline is strategically significant because it:  
(a) Connects UAE to Saudi Arabia's oil fields (b) Bypasses the Strait of Hormuz  
(c) Links UAE to Oman's refineries (d) Runs through the Persian Gulf underwater  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 13  
  
\=== PAGE 16 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
14\.  
  
16\.  
  
17\.  
  
19\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
The Habshan-Fujairah Pipeline connects inland oil fields of Habshan to which port?  
  
(a) Port of Dubai (b) Port of Abu Dhabi  
  
(c) Port of Fujairah on Gulf of Oman (d) Port of Jebel Ali  
  
UAE is ranked as the largest oil producer, and its exit reduces OPEC's collective discipline ability.  
(a) Ist Largest (b) 2nd Largest (c) 3rd Largest (d) 4th Largest  
  
Which of the following is a key reason behind UAE's exit from OPEC?  
(a) UAE's desire to join the International Energy Agency (IEA)  
  
(b) Production quota constraints limiting UAE's expanding oil capacity  
(c) UAE's complete pivot to renewable energy by 2026  
  
(d) Pressure from United States to exit OPEC  
  
UAE's exit from OPEC is expected to support India's De-Dollarisation Strategy by encouraging energy settlements in:  
(a) US Dollar (b) UAE Dirham (c) Indian Rupees (d) Special Drawing Rights (SDR)  
  
Which of the following is NOT a member of OPEC+?  
(a) Russia (b) Kazakhstan (c) Brazil (d) Indonesia  
  
What does OPEC primarily use to prevent extreme fluctuations in crude oil prices?  
(a) Currency swap agreements (b) Production Quotas  
  
(c) Import tariffs on petroleum (d) Strategic reserve releases  
  
Which of the following best describes the primary mandate of OPEC?  
  
(a) To promote renewable energy among member nations  
  
(b) To regulate international maritime oil trade routes  
  
(c) To protect oil exporters’ interests by coordinating production policies for stable supply and fair returns  
(d) To set global crude oil prices through a fixed pricing mechanism  
  
\=\] QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
ae International News  
  
e Project Freedom: Launched by United States to ensure Freedom of Navigation in Strait of Hormuz, assisting  
Neutral Commercial Vessels amid Geopolitical Tensions.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 14  
  
\=== PAGE 17 ===  
i May 2026  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
NEET PAPER  
LEAK  
CONTROVERSY  
  
Why in News?  
NEET 2026 Exam declared Compromised amid Paper Leak Allegations; NTA orders Re-Test for Aspirants Nationwide.  
  
66 Topic outlines Official Cancellation and planned Re — Sitting of NEET — UG 2026 examination  
following serious security breaches. Authorities initiated an investigation after reports surfaced regarding  
  
Cliffs Notes /  
  
illicit paper leaks and circulation of unauthorised exam materials on digital platforms. Evidence uncovered by  
law enforcement, including discovery of fraudulent "guess papers" that closely mirrored actual test,  
necessitated this drastic measure. National Testing Agency decided to void initial results to maintain integrity  
and public trust of competitive admission process. Consequently, test will be administered again for all  
candidates without requiring them to pay any further application costs. This decision underscores a  
commitment to fairness in high-stakes academic evaluations across the country.  
  
About NEET  
  
e Serves as National Entrance Examination for admission into Medical Colleges across India.  
  
e Conducted By: National Testing Agency  
  
Previous NEET — UG 2024 Case National Testing Agency  
  
e = In 2024, an Unusually High Number of Candidates achieved \_e Established in 2017. :  
Full Marks: 67 among Top 100 Scorers obtained Perfect : \* Autonomous Body under Department of.  
Scores. i i  
  
Higher Education, Ministry of Education.  
  
o By comparison Only Two Candidates secured Full Marks :  
  
in 2023 and No Candidate achieved Full Marks in 2022.  
  
e Following NEET — UG 2024 Controversy, Ministry of |  
Education constituted a high — level committee headed by :  
former ISRO Chairman Dr K Radhakrishnan.  
  
e Major Examinations Conducted: JEE |  
Main, NEET—UG, CUET i  
  
e Head: Pradeep Kumar Joshi  
HQ: New Delhi  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 15  
  
\=== PAGE 18 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
The Ripple Effect of Exam Malpractice  
  
SYSTEMIC & INSTITUTIONAL DAMAGE  
  
e Devaluation of  
“ay Academic Credentials  
  
1S.) 5 Loss of system credibility diminishes  
\\ 2 \* the market value of degrees and  
a merit rankings.  
Escalating  
Administrative  
  
Costs  
  
Re-conducting compromised  
examinations imposes a heavy  
financial burden on government  
institutions.  
  
Erosion of rs oti  
Public Trust im  
  
Large-scale cheating causes  
parents and students to lose  
confidence in educational fairness.  
  
Ww  
  
,  
  
ry  
  
IMPACT ON STUDENTS  
  
Academic &  
Admission  
Disruptions  
  
Exam cancellations delay  
admissions and disrupt the  
academic calendar for  
millions of students.  
  
Psychological Toll on  
Honest Candidates  
  
Unfair practices lead to significant stress, frustration,  
and demotivation for ethical students.  
  
Major Recommendations of Panel\]  
  
e Limiting Role of NTA: NTA should focus Only on Entrance Examinations for Higher Education Institutions and Not conduct  
  
Recruitment Examinations.  
  
e Institutional Restructuring: Creation of 10 new posts related to Administration, IT Infrastructure, Digital Security.  
  
e Digi—Exam Framework: Proposed a Technology — enabled Authentication System similar to Digi— Yatra.  
  
e¢ Governance Reforms: Recommended establishment of an empowered governing body with dedicated sub — committees for  
  
Test Audits, Ethics and Transparency, Staff Management and Appointments.  
  
e Secure Examination Centres: Recommended greater use of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan Institutions and Jawahar  
  
Navodaya Vidyalaya campuses as examination centres.  
  
e Shift Towards Online Examinations: Proposed Gradual Adoption of Computer Adaptive Testing for Future Entrance  
  
Examinations.  
  
Public Examination (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act 2024  
  
e Objective: To curb Paper Leaks, Organized Cheating & Manipulation in Recruitment & Entrance Examinations.  
  
e Penalties Under Act  
  
o For Individuals: Imprisonment ranging from 3 to 10 years dependi  
  
\= Monetary Penalties up to 1 Crore in cases involving  
organized malpractice.  
o For Service Providers: Fine up to 1 Crore  
\= Debarment from conducting examinations for 4 Years  
o For Organized Crimes: Imprisonment between 5 and 10 Years  
& Minimum fine of %1 Crore.  
\= Possibility of Property Attachment and Forfeiture.  
  
ng on offence.  
  
Scope of “Unfair Means”  
Leakage of Question Papers or Answer Keys  
Candidate Impersonation  
Unauthorized Assistance during Examinations  
Tampering with Computer Systems or Networks  
Conducting Fake Examinations  
Manipulating Merit Lists or Official Documents  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 16  
  
\=== PAGE 19 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
Nature of Offences: Cognisable,  
Non — Bailable, Non —  
Compoundable  
  
Investigating Authority: Conducted  
by officers not below rank of Deputy  
Superintendent of Police or  
Assistant Commissioner of Police  
  
o Central Government may transfer  
  
investigations to a Central  
Investigating Agency when  
required.  
  
Launched in 2022, it aims to upgrade over 14/500 schools into  
NEP-aligned model institutions with integrated smart  
classrooms, experiential pedagogy, and 2Ist-century skills.  
  
Integrates all school education schemes from  
pre-primary to Class 12. It emphasizes equity,  
inclusivity, and quality through holistic  
development.  
  
Prerana  
  
Week-long residential programme  
designed for students of Classes IX—XIl. It  
combines cultural heritage, cutting-edge  
technology, and values-based learning to  
foster lead.  
  
ULLAS  
  
Launched for 2022-27, it empowers adults  
with basic literacy and digital skills. It  
encourages lifelong learning and enables  
greater societal participation.  
  
NIPUN Bharat Mission  
  
Initiated in 2021 to ensure that every child  
attains foundational literacy and numeracy by  
the end of Grade 3, with nationwide targets set  
for 2026-27.  
  
MNM and NPST  
  
National Mission for Mentoring (MNM) focuses on  
providing mentoring and professional support to  
teachers. National Professional Standards for Teachers  
(NPST) guides career advancement and defines the  
  
quality of teachers and their competencies.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
www. lawpreptutorial.com  
Ministry of Education Jag=  
&, Government of india Azadi xa  
  
Amrit Mahotsav  
  
PM SHRI  
  
\* s \* » PM ScHools for Rising India  
  
Empowering students with 20 century skills  
  
\* More than 14500 Schools across the  
country to emerge as Exemplar  
Schools  
  
\* Centrally sponsored scheme  
(PM SHRI Schools) will be for a period  
of 5 Years i.e. 2022 - 2027  
  
\* PM SHRI schools will showcase all the  
components of NEP 2020  
  
\* Total project cost - Rs. 27360 crore  
over a period of 5 years r)  
  
\* Total Central share will be Rs. 18128  
crore  
  
Vidya Pravesh  
  
A 3-month play-based transition module for children  
  
) entering Grade 1. It ensures school readiness through  
activities that promote socio-emotional learning.  
  
Vidyanjali  
This School Volunteer Management  
Programme fosters community participation by  
  
inviting individuals, NGOs, and corporates to  
contribute to school improvement.  
  
GOVERNMENT  
SCHEMES AND  
INITIATIVES  
UNDER NEP 2020  
  
Diksha  
  
Offers digital content and teacher  
training resources. It supports states with  
multilingual, curriculum-aligned  
materials.  
  
PM e-Vidya  
  
Unifies all efforts related to  
digital/online/on-air education to enable  
multi-mode access to education.  
  
One of the largest teacher training i tives,  
NISHTHA provides in-service training for  
teachers across foundational, elementary,  
and secondary levels.  
  
Provides hot cooked meals to children studying in  
y Government and Government-aided schools to improve  
their nutritional status.  
  
Skill — Up: Digi — Exam, Right to Education, New Education Policy 2020  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@ 17  
  
\=== PAGE 20 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
What does NEET stand for?  
(a) National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (b) National Examination for Engineering Test  
(c) National Entry Evaluation Test (d) National Education Entrance Test  
  
In which year was the National Testing Agency (NTA) established?  
(a) 2014 (b) 2015 (c) 2016 (d) 2017  
  
The NTA is an autonomous body under which department?  
(a) Department of Science and Technology (b) Department of Higher Education  
(c) Department of School Education (d) Department of Health and Family Welfare  
  
Who is the Head of the National Testing Agency (NTA)?  
(a) Dr K Radhakrishnan (b) Dr Rajendra Kumar —(c) Pradeep Kumar Joshi (d) Amit Shah  
  
Where is the Headquarters of the National Testing Agency located?  
(a) Mumbai (b) Chennai (c) Bengaluru (d) New Delhi  
  
Following the NEET-UG 2024 controversy, the Ministry of Education constituted a high-level committee. Who  
headed this committee?  
  
(a) Former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan (b) Former ISRO Chairman Dr K Radhakrishnan  
  
(c) Former CJI D Y Chandrachud (d) Former CAG Vinod Rai  
  
What is the primary objective of the Public Examination (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act 2024?  
(a) To digitise all government examinations  
  
(b) To curb paper leaks, organised cheating and manipulation in examinations  
  
(c) To increase the number of examination centres  
  
(d) To reduce examination fees for candidates  
  
Under the Public Examination (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act 2024, what is the imprisonment range for individuals  
found guilty?  
(a) 1 to 5 years (b) 2 to 7 years (c) 3 to 10 years (d) 5 to 14 years  
  
What is the maximum monetary penalty for service providers found guilty under the Act?  
(a) 710 Lakh (b) %50 Lakh (c) =75 Lakh (d) 1 Crore  
  
For how many years can service providers be debarred from conducting examinations under the Act?  
(a) 2 Years (b) 4 Years (c) 6 Years (d) 10 Years  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 18  
  
\=== PAGE 21 ===  
"May 2026  
  
(es TOPIC  
DF inNEWS  
  
BHOJSHALA -  
KAMAL MAULA  
COMPLEX  
  
Why in News?  
Bhojshala — Kamal Maula Complex declared Hindu Temple (Goddess Vagdevi / Saraswati) by Madhya Pradesh High  
Court based on Archaeological Survey of India findings from 2024 Survey.  
  
MP High Court quashes 2003 ASI order allowing Shared Worship at Bhojshala— Kamal Maula Complex.  
  
Bhoj Shala — Kamal Maula Complex  
  
e = Term "Bhojgala" became linked to building in early 20" century, based on  
  
Religious Claims  
  
inscriptions found at site by KK Lele.  
  
e Medieval ASI—protected Monument located in Dhar (MP). \_¢ Hindus claim site asa Saraswati Temple.  
  
e \~=Built By: Raja Bhoj in 1034 AD.  
  
e Muslims consider it a Mosque  
associated with Kamal Maula.  
  
Under a 2003 ASI Arrangement, Both  
Communities were permitted to offer  
  
e — Structure is believed to have functioned originally as a Temple dedicated .  
to Goddess Saraswati (Vagdevi).  
  
Worship on Separate Designated Days.  
  
o Intricately Carved Idol of Goddess Saraswati was discovered at site  
  
during excavations in 20" Century.  
  
© This idol is currently housed in British Museum in Raja Bhoj  
  
Recognized as Mihir Bhoja.  
  
London.  
  
e Traditionally regarded as a Centre of Sanskrit Learning  
and Scholarship.  
  
e Reportedly converted into a Mosque in 1514 AD under  
Muslim Rule (Mehmudshah Khilji I) in Dhar.  
  
e¢ Most Illustrious Emperor of Gurjara—Pratihara Empire.  
  
© Capital: Kannauj (Mahodaya)  
e Follower of Vaishnavism.  
  
e Assumed title of “Adivaraha” (Boar Incarnation of Lord  
  
Vishnu).  
e Arab traveler Al — Masudi referred to him as "King  
  
o Muslims identify structure as Kamal Maula  
Mosque associated with Sufi Saint Hazrat Maulana  
  
Kamaluddin Chishti. Baura".  
  
Architectural Features  
  
©) Structural remains indicate a Mandapa — style Hall (Characteristic of Hindu Temple Architecture).  
  
e Site uniquely preserves 2 Sarpabandha (Serpentine Chart) Pillar Inscriptions.  
  
o Serve as Educational Tools charting Sanskrit Alphabet, Noun/Verb Terminations and Ten Tenses and  
Moods of Sanskrit Grammar.  
  
e Walls within complex feature Stone Slabs engraved with Two Distinct Odes dedicated to Kurma — Avatara (Tortoise  
Incarnation of Lord Vishnu), composed in Prakrit Language.  
  
e Sanskrit and Pali Inscriptions discovered on Pillars and Walls mention Paramara Rulers such as Udayaditya,  
Naravarman and Arjunavarma Deva.  
  
¢ Site also references Sanskrit drama Karpuramanjari written by royal tutor Madana, a disciple of Jain scholar  
  
Ashadhara, dating back to reign of King Arjunavarma.  
  
FOLLOW USNOW O@O@ 19  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
\=== PAGE 22 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
Madhya Pradesh High Court Judgment  
  
e = Court ruled Places of Worship Act 1991  
inapplicable as Site falls under  
AMASR Act 1958 as Protected  
Monument.  
  
o Section 4(3) of Places of Worship  
Act 1991 excludes Ancient  
Monuments under AMASR Act  
1958 from Religious Character  
Freeze Provision.  
  
e Rejection of Historical Proclamation:  
Bench rejected Muslim Side's Reliance  
on an Aug 1935 Official Proclamation  
by princely State of Dhar under Gol Act  
1935, noting that Act itself was Not  
Enforced until Apr 1937.  
  
o Unlike Babri Masjid Dispute,  
which was treated as a Title Suit  
involving Ownership Claims,  
Bhojshala Case was considered a  
Writ Petition under Article 226  
seeking Enforcement of  
Fundamental Right to Worship.  
  
e Alternative Allotment for Mosque: To  
maintain Complete Justice and secure  
Religious Rights, Court directed State  
Government to consider Applications  
for Allotting Alternative, Suitable Land  
within Dhar for Construction of a  
Mosque or Prayer Site.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
i:,:( Places of Worship Act, 1991  
  
ikea lami ikea lal  
  
The Places of Worship Act, 1991, was passed by the P V Narasimha Rao-led Congress government.  
  
To uphold the religious  
identity of a place of worship.  
  
A  
  
Te ;  
of any place of worship  
Prohibition of Conversion : : Maintenance of Religious  
  
(Section 3)  
  
Character (Section 4(1))  
  
Prohibits converting a place of Ensures that the religious identity  
  
worship between or within ya Nhe} of a place of worship remains the  
Key  
  
religious denominations same as it was on August 15, 1947.  
  
Abatement of Pending  
Cases (Section 4(2))  
  
Penalties for violating the Act ‘  
Legal proceedings on religious  
  
include a maximum rai pana ‘eae  
racter conversions pre\~ i  
imprisonment term of 3 years Character conversigns pre are  
terminated, with new cases allowed  
  
d fines.  
and fines. only for changes post-1947.  
  
Penalties (Section 6) ErOMsinns  
  
Exceptions to the Act (Section 5)  
  
CSETEFY ancient monuments  
  
under the Ancient Monuments TT) cases settled) 0 (ee FEE) Ayodhya dispute  
and Archaeological Sites and the Act's implementation. and related legal proceedings.  
  
Remains Act, 1958.  
  
awe a Limits judicial review, undermining constitutional checks and  
Bar on Judicial Review  
ole balances.  
Covers “pilgrimage sites” and “burial grounds” from the  
ws Dilutes Federalism Pre 2 a  
  
State List, infringing state rights.  
  
Criticism és Violation of the Right to B-emutary reclaiming worship places, impacting  
a Religion (Art 25-28) freedom of religion and secularism.  
  
Differential treatment undermines equality  
  
(Art 14-15).  
  
Arbitrary Cutoff Date Independence Day 1947 ignores historical injustices and pre-  
1947 encroachments.  
  
Supreme Court’s (SC ws on the Act  
  
A Exclusion of Ayodhya  
  
\>i  
  
The Act upholds secular values |  
and prohibits retrogression |  
(2019 Ayodhya verdict). H  
  
Ensures preservation of re\! i  
sites and their character, instilling |  
confidence in all communities.  
  
e Administrative Stewardship: ASI has been granted Full Supervisory, Management and Administrative Control over property  
  
to regulate Religious Access, Preserve 11" Century Monument and manage affairs related to Sanskrit Learning at site.  
  
Gurjara — Pratiharas  
  
Founder: Nagabhata I (730—756 AD)  
Tripartite Struggle: Pratiharas were Central Figures in prolonged Tripartite Struggle against Palas of Bengal  
and Rashtrakutas of Deccan.  
  
Architectural Legacy (Mahu-Gujjara Style): Teli—ka— Mandir (Gwalior Fort, MP), Bateswar Temples (Morena,  
MP), Osian Temples (Jodhpur, Rajasthan).  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 20  
  
\=== PAGE 23 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Where is the Bhojshala— Kamal Maula Complex located?  
(a) Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh (b) Dhar, Madhya Pradesh  
(c) Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh (d) Indore, Madhya Pradesh  
  
Who built the Bhojshala complex and in which year?  
(a) Mehmudshah Khilji Il in 1514 AD (b) Nagabhata I in 730 AD  
(c) Raja Bhoj in 1034 AD (d) Kamaluddin Chishti in 1200 AD  
  
Bhojshala is originally believed to have functioned as a temple dedicated to which goddess?  
(a) Goddess Durga (b) Goddess Saraswati (c) Goddess Lakshmi (d) Goddess Parvati  
  
The term 'Bhojshala' became linked to the building in the early 20th century based on inscriptions found by whom?  
(a) John Marshall (b) Alexander Cunningham  
(c) KK Lele (d) Mortimer Wheeler  
  
Under the 2003 ASI arrangement, what was permitted at the Bhojshala — Kamal Maula Complex?  
(a) Only Hindus could worship there  
  
(b) Only Muslims could worship there  
  
(c) Both communities could worship on separate designated days  
  
(d) The site was closed to all worship  
  
The intricately carved idol of Goddess Saraswati discovered at the Bhojshala site is currently housed where?  
(a) National Museum, New Delhi (b) Madhya Pradesh State Museum, Bhopal  
(c) Louvre Museum, Paris (d) British Museum, London  
  
The structure at Bhojshala is believed to have been converted into a mosque in which year and under whose rule?  
(a) 1526 AD under Babur (b) 1514 AD under Mehmudshah Khilji I  
(c) 1192 AD under Muhammad Ghori (d) 1600 AD under Akbar  
  
Muslims identify the structure as a mosque associated with which Sufi saint?  
(a) Hazrat Nizamuddin Auliya (b) Moinuddin Chishti  
(c) Hazrat Maulana Kamaluddin Chishti (d) Qutbuddin Bakhtiyar Kaki  
  
What type of architectural structure do the remains of Bhojshala indicate?  
(a) Shikhara - style Temple (b) Mandapa - style Hall  
(c) Gopuram - style Gateway (d) Vimana - style Sanctum  
  
The walls of the Bhojshala complex feature stone slabs with odes dedicated to which avatar of Lord Vishnu?  
(a) Matsya Avatara (Fish) (b) Varaha Avatara (Boar)  
(c) Kurma Avatara (Tortoise) (d) Narasimha Avatara (Lion-Man)  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 21  
  
\=== PAGE 24 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
14\.  
  
15\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
The Sanskrit drama 'Karpuramanjari' referenced at the Bhojshala site was written by whom?  
(a) Kalidasa (b) Bhavabhuti (c) Madana (d) Vishakhadatta  
  
Why did the Madhya Pradesh High Court rule the Places of Worship Act 1991 inapplicable to Bhojshala?  
(a) Because it was a private property  
  
(b) Because Section 4(3) excludes ancient monuments under AMASR Act 1958  
  
(c) Because the site was built before 1947  
  
(d) Because both communities agreed to waive the Act  
  
How did the Bhojshala case differ legally from the Babri Masjid dispute?  
  
(a) Bhojshala was a criminal case; Babri was a civil matter  
  
(b) Bhojshala was a Writ Petition under Article 226 for fundamental right to worship; Babri was a Title Suit  
(c) Bhojshala involved central government intervention; Babri did not  
  
(d) Bhojshala was decided by the Supreme Court; Babri by the High Court  
  
Which body was granted full supervisory, management and administrative control over the Bhojshala property?  
(a) State Government of Madhya Pradesh (b) Archaeological Survey of India  
(c) Ministry of Minority Affairs (d) Supreme Court-appointed Committee  
  
Raja Bhoj (Mihir Bhoja) was the most illustrious emperor of which empire?  
(a) Rashtrakuta Empire (b) Pala Empire ( com —  
  
(c) Gurjara—Pratihara Empire (d) Paramara Empire  
  
Ws: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
‘I Polity and Governance  
  
e Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority under One District One Product  
facilitated 1“ ever Export of Baska Honey from Assam (Bodoland Territorial Region) to United States.  
  
o One District One Product initiative was 1“ launched by Uttar Pradesh in 2018. Later adopted at national  
level by Ministry of Commerce and Industry.  
  
e Ministry of Health and Family Welfare launched JANANI (Journey of Antenatal, Natal and Neonatal Integrated  
Care) Platform.  
  
o = JANANI Platform: Service — oriented Digital System for Monitoring and Maintaining Women's  
Reproductive Health Records, developed as an upgraded version of Reproductive and Child Health Portal.  
  
e Sikkim became India's 1“ Fully Paperless Judiciary State by digitising High Court and All District Courts.  
  
o In2022, Kerala became 1" State with a Paperless High Court.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 22  
  
\=== PAGE 25 ===  
iP “May 2026  
  
‘gs, TOPIC  
DF inNEWS  
  
INCREASE IN  
SUPREME COURT  
JUDGE STRENGTH  
  
Why in News?  
  
Union Cabinet of India Approved Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill 2026 to expand strength of  
Supreme Court of India from 34 to 38 Judges (CJI + 37 Judges).  
  
Article 124 empowers Parliament to increase Number of Supreme Court Judges by law.  
  
Legal Framework  
\-e Governed by Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956.  
  
e = Any Increase requires Amendment Bill passed by Both Houses of Parliament with Simple Majority Sufficient and  
Presidential Assent.  
  
Union Judiciary (Supreme Court)  
  
e Inaugurated on "Jan 28, 1950".  
o Succeeded "Federal Court of India", established under "Government of India Act of 1935".  
e "Apex Court" of Indian Judicial System.  
  
o Replaced "British Privy Council" as "Highest Court of Appeal".  
  
e "Articles 124 to 147" in "Part 5" of Constitution deals with Organisation, Independence, Jurisdiction, Powers, Procedures  
and so on of Supreme Court.  
  
e Acts as "Final Interpreter and Guardian of Indian Constitution".  
e Presently, it consists of "Chief Justice and 37 Other Judges".  
o Originally, Strength of Supreme Court was fixed at "8" (1 Chief Justice and 7 Other Judges).  
  
o "Parliament" may increase Number of Judges if it deems necessary.  
  
Significance  
\_e Faster Disposal of Cases: Helps Reduce Massive Judicial Backlog  
e = Timely Justice Delivery: Improves Efficiency in Constitutional & Civil Matters.  
e Better Bench Formation: Easier Constitution of Constitution Benches, Special Benches and Larger Benches  
for Important Cases.  
Strengthening Judicial Capaci  
  
: Addresses Rising Litigation Burden  
  
Appointment of Judges — Article 124 (2)  
  
e Judges of Supreme Court are appointed by President.  
  
e CJL is appointed by President after “Consultation” with Such Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts as he deems  
necessary.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 23  
  
\=== PAGE 26 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
o Normally, "Senior Most Judge of Supreme Court" is  
  
Qualifications  
/e Shouldbe a "Citizen of India".  
  
e Should have been a "Judge of a High Court" (o:  
High Courts in Succession) for "5 Years"; or  
  
appointed as "Chief Justice of India".  
  
co Although, there is "No Constitutional Requirement" to  
do so.  
  
Other Judges are appointed by the President after  
  
Consultation with the CJI and Such Other Judges of the  
Supreme Court and the High Courts as he deems necessary.  
  
o Should have been an "Advocate of a Hig  
Court" (or High Courts in succession) for "1  
  
. . . . Years"; or  
o While appointing Other Judges, "President" is bound to  
  
o Should be a "Distinguished Jurist" in opinio:  
of "President".  
  
consult "CJI and Other Senior Judges", if he deems  
proper.  
  
Violation of Convention related to Appointment of CJI  
\- Justice from 1950 to 1973, practice has been to appoint “Seniormost Judge of Supreme Court” as “Chief justice of |  
India”.  
e = This established convention was violated in “1973” when "AN Ray" was appointed as "Chief Justice of India" by |  
superseding "3 Senior Judges" (JM Shelat, KS Hegde, AN Grover). :  
e = Again in “1977”, "MU Beg" was appointed as ‘Chief Justice of India” by superseding then “Senior Most  
Judge” (HR Khanna).  
This "Discretion of Government" was curtailed by Supreme Court in “2" Judges Case" (1993), in which Supreme  
Court ruled that “‘Seniormost Judge of Supreme Court” should alone be appointed to office of ‘‘Chief Justice of  
» India”.  
  
Controversy over Consultation  
  
1" Judges Case (1981): "Consultation" does "Not Mean  
  
Concurrence" and it "Only Implies Exchange of Views". Tenure of Judges  
  
2™ Judges Case (1993): SC reversed its earlier ruling and changed  
Minimum Age" is for Appointment of a Judge.  
  
meaning of word "Consultation to Concurrence".  
¢ Holds office until he attains age of "65 years".  
  
o Hence, it ruled that "Advice" tendered by "Chief Justice of  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
: Constitution has "Not Fixed" Tenure and "No:  
  
e Resign from his office by writing to  
  
India" is "Binding" on "President" in matters of Appointment  
  
of Judges of Supreme Court.  
  
o Chief Justice would tender his advice on matter after  
  
consulting 2 of his Seniormost Colleagues.  
  
3" Judges Case (1998): SC opined that "Consultation"  
Process to be adopted by "Chief Justice of India" requires  
"Consultation of Plurality Judges".  
o “Sole Opinion of Chief Justice of India” does “Not  
Constitute Consultation Process”.  
o Heshould consult a Collegium of “4 Seniormost Judges  
of Supreme Court".  
\= If2 Judges give an Adverse Opinion, he should Not  
Send recommendation to Government.  
  
"President".  
¢ Removed from his office by "President" on  
"Recommendation of Parliament".  
  
Composition of NJAC  
CJI: Ex— Officio Chairperson  
2 Seniormost SC Judges: Ex— Officio Members  
“Union Minister of Law and Justice” as Ex  
Officio Member  
“2 Eminent Persons” from Civil Society to b  
nominated by CJI, PM, Leader of Opposition i  
  
Lok Sabha  
  
o One of Eminent Persons to be Nominated from  
SC/ST/OBC/Minorities or Women.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
24  
  
\=== PAGE 27 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance \[= Tutorial = “|  
  
e 4" Judges Case (2015): "99" Constitutional Amendment Act of 2014" and "National Judicial Appointments Commission Act  
of 2014" have replaced "Collegium System" of appointing Judges to Supreme Court and High Courts with a new body called  
"National Judicial Appointments Commission".  
  
o However, in "2015", Supreme Court has declared both 99" Constitutional Amendment as well as NJAC Act as  
"Unconstitutional and Void".  
  
o SCopined that NJAC would affect "Independence of Judiciary".  
  
Extra Shots  
  
\_ Amidst Charges of Corruption, Land — Grab and Abuse of Judicial Office, "PD Dinakaran", Chief Justice of  
| Sikkim High Court, against whom Rajya Sabha Chairman had set up a Judicial Panel to look into Allegations of  
  
: Corruption, resigned in 2011, before impeachment proceedings could be initiated against him.  
  
Acting Chief Justice (Article 126)  
\-e “President” can appoint a “Judge of Supreme Court” as an Acting Chief Justice of India when:  
o Office of Chief Justice of India is “Vacant” or “Temporarily Absent” or “Unable to Perform Duties”.  
Ad — Hoc Judge (Article 127)  
  
When there is a "Lack of Quorum of Permanent Judges" to hold or continue Any Session of Supreme Court, "Chief :  
Justice of India" can appoint a "Judge of a High Court" as an "Ad Hoc Judge" of Supreme Court for a "Temporary :  
Period".  
o Hecando so "Only After Consultation" with "Chief Justice of High Court concerned" and with "Previous  
  
Consent of the President".  
  
Retired Judges (Article 128)  
  
"CJI" can request a "Retired Judge of Supreme Court" or a "Retired Judge of a High Court" to act as a "Judge of |  
  
Supreme Court" for a "Temporary Period". :  
o Hecandoso only with "Previous Consent of President" and also of "Person" to be so appointed.  
  
A: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
| Polity and Governance  
  
e Union Cabinet approved 2 New Semiconductor Plants in Gujarat, including India's 1“ Commercial Gallium  
Nitride (GaN) Mini /Micro—LED Display Facility at Dholera.  
  
e India's 1“ Private (Geomysore Services India Pvt Ltd) Gold Mining Project set for launch in Kurnool (Andhra  
Pradesh), backed by Thriveni Earthmovers and Deccan Gold.  
  
e All India Institute of Medical Sciences (Delhi) introduced India's 1“ Portable MRI System for ICU and  
Emergency Patients.  
  
e India launched its 1“ Multi—Lane Free Flow Tolling System in Gujarat.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 25  
  
\=== PAGE 28 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
| JURISDICTIONS OF SUPREME COURT OF INDIA  
  
Apellate Jusridiction Original Jusridiction  
  
The cases come to the Supreme  
Court in the form of appeals  
against the judgments of the  
  
lower courts and this is called  
appellate jurisdiction.  
  
Appeals from High Courts can be Article 131: The SC has original  
made whether in civil, criminal or Jurisdiction in matters related to  
  
other proceedings if the High Court any dispute between:  
certifies under Article 134A that the  
case involves a substantial question Government of VS One or  
of law as to the interpretation of India More States  
this Constitution.  
  
Article 32: The SC can be  
approached directly for remedy  
  
in case of Violation of  
Fundamental Rights.  
  
Article 132: Appeals in civil, crimi- Governmentof yg state(s)  
nal or other proceedings. India + State(s)  
  
Article 132: Appeals in regard to  
  
civil matters. State(s) VS — State(s)  
  
Article 134: Appeals in regard to =  
  
Gahitall mente, Dispute should involve a question whether  
  
of law or fact on which the existence or  
extent of a legal right depends.  
  
Advisory Jusridiction  
The President can refer a i ager oa ied  
question to the Supreme Court for Article 143  
consideration and seek the opinion of the  
Supreme court if he feel that it is of public  
importance or such a nature that requires  
  
the opinion of the Supreme Court.  
  
The opinion of the Supreme  
Court is NOT Binding on  
the President of India.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 26  
  
\=== PAGE 29 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
REMOVAL  
PROCESS  
  
ey oo)  
  
Aly Judges Enquiry Act (1968)  
governs the removal procedure  
for SC and HC judges.  
  
————r\[—™=™ 7  
) GROUNDS \\  
Be initiation FOR  
Requires a motion signed by \\  
Tiel tithe | REMOVAL  
PRT arith  
LOO Mest pOMEsiN Constitutional Provisions:  
Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha ARTICLE 124(4)  
5  
ARTICLE 218  
  
a A it Provide the legal basis  
  
CJlor High \_ Distinguished r ‘  
SCjudge CourtCJ jurist  
  
\~\~  
  
Tasks: Investigates charges, fF  
examines evidence, cross-examines  
witnesses, and reports findings to  
the Speaker/Chairperson.  
  
Parliamentary Vote  
  
¢ Approval by of members  
\[present and voting Eat  
(eye Fran y-ed)in both Houses.  
\* If both Houses agree, @ENECnY  
  
issues the removal order.  
  
Termination of Proceedings  
  
If the committee finds  
no guilt, proceedings  
are dropped.  
  
\* Process is identical for Supreme  
Court and High Court judges.  
  
Criteria:  
  
Removal is permitted  
on grounds of  
proven misbehaviour or  
incapacity.  
  
Tr  
  
The Constitution does  
not use the word  
‘impeachment’ for judges.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
LAW PREP ——oxino  
  
\>  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
CASES OF JUDICIAL  
IMPEACHMENT  
  
Justice Ramaswami (1993)  
  
Accused of financial  
impropriety. Motion  
failed as LS abstained  
from voting.  
  
Justice Soumitra Sen (2011)  
  
Guilty of corruption,  
impeached in RS but  
resigned before LS  
discussion.  
  
Justice S. K. Gangele (2015)  
  
Justice Pardiwala (2015)  
  
Motion dropped after  
controversial remarks  
on reservations were  
expunged.  
  
Cleared bya  
committee on  
sexual harassment  
charges.  
  
Justice C. V. Nagarjuna (2017)  
  
Accused of victimizing a  
Dalit judge and financial  
misconduct, the motion  
failed due to lack of  
signatures.  
  
27  
  
\=== PAGE 30 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
10\.  
  
1\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
The Union Cabinet approved a bill to expand the strength of the Supreme Court from 34 to how many judges?  
(a) 36 Judges (b) 38 Judges (c) 40 Judges (d) 42 Judges  
  
Which Article of the Indian Constitution empowers Parliament to increase the number of Supreme Court Judges?  
(a) Article 120 (b) Article 122 (c) Article 124 (d) Article 131  
  
Increasing the number of Supreme Court judges is governed by which Act?  
(a) Supreme Court (Judges) Act, 1950 (b) Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956  
(c) Judiciary Reform Act, 1960 (d) Supreme Court Administration Act, 1947  
  
What type of majority is required in Parliament to pass the Amendment Bill for increasing Supreme Court judges?  
(a) Two-thirds Special Majority (b) Absolute Majority  
(c) Simple Majority (d) Three-fourths Majority  
  
The Supreme Court of India was inaugurated on which date?  
(a) January 26, 1950 (b) January 28, 1950 (c) August 15, 1947 (d) November 26, 1949  
  
The Supreme Court of India succeeded which court that was established under the Government of India Act, 1935?  
(a) British Privy Council (b) Allahabad High Court  
(c) Federal Court of India (d) King's Bench Division  
  
What was the original strength of the Supreme Court when it was established?  
(a) 4 judges (b) 6 judges (c) 8 judges (d) 10 judges  
  
Articles 124 to 147 in which Part of the Constitution deal with the Supreme Court?  
(a) Part 3 (b) Part 4 (c) Part 5 (d) Part 6  
  
Which of the following is NOT a prescribed qualification for appointment as a Supreme Court Judge?  
(a) Judge of a High Court for 5 years (b) Advocate of a High Court for 10 years  
(c) Distinguished Jurist in the opinion of the President (d) Member of Parliament for at least one term  
  
Who appoints the judges of the Supreme Court of India?  
(a) Prime Minister (b) Chief Justice of India  
  
(c) President of India (d) Parliament  
  
In which year was the established convention of appointing the seniormost judge as CJI first violated, and who was  
  
appointed?  
(a) 1970 — Justice MH Beg (b) 1973 — Justice AN Ray  
(c) 1977 — Justice HR Khanna (d) 1993 — Justice JS Verma  
  
In 1977, which judge was superseded when MU Beg was appointed as Chief Justice of India?  
(a) JM Shelat (b) KS Hegde (c) AN Grover (d) HR Khanna  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 28  
  
\=== PAGE 31 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
13\.  
  
16\.  
  
19\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What did the Ist Judges Case (1981) rule about the word 'Consultation' in judicial appointments?  
(a) Consultation means Concurrence and is binding on the President  
  
(b) Consultation does not mean Concurrence; it only implies exchange of views  
  
(c) Consultation must involve a collegium of 4 senior judges  
  
(d) Consultation is not required for appointment of High Court judges  
  
What landmark ruling did the Supreme Court make in the 2nd Judges Case (1993)?  
(a) Collegium system was abolished (b) NJAC was established  
(c) 'Consultation' was changed to mean 'Concurrence’ (d) President was given absolute power to appoint judges  
  
According to the 3rd Judges Case (1998), the CJI must consult a collegium of how many seniormost judges before  
making recommendations?  
(a) 2 judges (b) 3 judges (c) 4 judges (d) 5 judges  
  
The National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC) was established by which Constitutional Amendment?  
(a) 97th Constitutional Amendment (b) 98th Constitutional Amendment  
(c) 99th Constitutional Amendment (d) 100th Constitutional Amendment  
  
Why did the Supreme Court strike down the NJAC in the 4th Judges Case (2015)?  
(a) It violated the right to equality (b) It was passed without proper Parliamentary procedure  
(c) It would affect the independence of the judiciary — (d) It was against the directive principles  
  
Under Article 126, the President can appoint an Acting Chief Justice of India when the office of CJI is vacant,  
temporarily absent, or unable to perform duties. From whom is this Acting CJI appointed?  
(a) A retired Chief Justice of India (b) A Judge of the Supreme Court  
(c) A Chief Justice of a High Court (d) The Attorney General of India  
  
Under Article 127, who can appoint an Ad-hoc Judge of the Supreme Court when there is a lack of quorum?  
(a) President of India (b) Union Minister of Law and Justice  
(c) Chief Justice of India (d) Prime Minister in consultation with the CJI  
  
Who was PD Dinakaran and what was significant about his resignation in 2011?  
  
(a) He was a Supreme Court Judge who was impeached by Parliament  
  
(b) He was Chief Justice of Sikkim High Court who resigned before impeachment proceedings amid corruption  
charges  
  
(c) He was an Attorney General who resigned over a judicial controversy  
  
(d) He was a Supreme Court Judge who refused to take oath of office  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 29  
  
\=== PAGE 32 ===  
"May 2026  
  
(ahs TOPIC  
: “inNEWS  
  
ANTI-DEFECTION  
LAW  
  
Why in News?  
7 of 10 Rajya Sabha MPs defect to rival Party, signalling Major Political Realignment within Party Ranks.  
  
Defecting MPs escape Disqualification under Anti—Defection Law, protected by Party Merger Provision Exception.  
  
Anti — Defection Law  
  
¢ Introduced through 52™ Constitutional Amendment Act, 1985.  
  
Constitutional Grounds for  
  
e Enshrined in 10" Schedule of Indian Constitution.  
  
Disqualification  
e Objective: To prevent Political Defections and ensure Stability in Under Articles 102 (1) and 191(1), a ;  
Governments. Legislator can be Disqualified if they:  
e Originates from phrase “Aaya Ram Gaya Ram”, linked to Frequent e Holdan Office of Profit.  
Party — Switching by Legislators in 1960s. e Are declared of Unsound Mind by a  
Key Features of Anti — Defection Law Court.  
  
e = Arean Undischarged Insolvent.  
  
¢ Grounds for Disqualification: A Legislator is Disqualified if they  
Voluntarily give up Party Membership or Vote/Abstain contrary to Party  
Whip.  
  
o Exception: If prior permission is taken or party condones action  
  
e Lose Indian Citizenship or show  
Allegiance to Another Country.  
e Are Disqualified under Any Law  
  
made by Parliament.  
  
within 15 days.  
  
e Applicability to Different Members  
Key Supreme Court Judgments  
  
o Independent Members: Disqualified if they join a party After j Kihoto Hollohan vs Zachillhu (1992):  
Election. Speaker's decisions are subject to Judicial  
o Nominated Members: Disqualified if they join a party after 6 Review.  
Months of Nomination. Keisham Meghachandra Singh vs Speaker  
  
Manipur (2020): Decisions on  
disqualification should ideally be made  
within 3 Months.  
  
e Deciding Authority: Speaker (Lok Sabha) or Chairman (Rajya  
Sabha)  
  
Exceptions under Law  
  
e Merger Provision: No Disqualification if 2/3" of Members (91" CAA 2003) of a Legislature Party agree to  
Merge with Another Party.  
  
¢ Removal of Split Provision: Earlier, 1/3 Members could Split Without Disqualification.  
  
o This provision was removed by 91" CAA 2003 to strengthen law.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 30  
  
\=== PAGE 33 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Key Issues and Challenges  
  
e Delay in Decision — Making: Disqualification Petitions often Remain Pending for Long Durations, affecting political  
  
stability.  
  
e Allegations of Bias: Speaker/Chairman may act in a Partisan Manner, as they often belong to Ruling Party.  
  
e Limited Judicial Intervention: Courts typically intervene Only After Speaker's Decision, limiting timely remedies.  
  
e Curtailment of Legislative Freedom: Restricts MPs/MLAs from Voting Independently and Expressing Dissent within  
  
Legislature  
  
e Rigid Whip System: Party Whips are issued even on Non — Critical Matters, reducing Intra — Party Democracy.  
  
¢ Scope for Mass Defections: 2/3" Merger Clause enables Large — scale Defections, undermining Law's Intent.  
  
gray  
  
LANTI-DEFECTION LAWG = LawPrrr  
  
Lays down process by which le: jators may be disqualified on the grounds of defection.  
  
The Gera re e-em) added the 10th  
  
Schedule (Anti-Defection Bill) to the Constitution.  
  
Act Amended ¥  
  
ca  
Articles of theic 101 102 190 191  
  
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE LAW  
  
4 Atiows party mergers Makes legislators  
without disqualifying accountable for their  
members. conduct.  
  
3 Ensures party stability 4 ensures party discipline  
and prevents government through adherence to the  
instability. whip.  
  
5 prevents defectionsfor @ Reinforces democracy  
office or material gain. and combats corruption  
  
Sc JUDGMENTS ON ANTI-DEFECTION LAW  
Kihota Hollohon vs. Zachilhu & Ors: Speaker's  
decision under the 10th Schedule is final.  
  
Ravi S Naik vs. Union of India AIR: Membership  
can be inferred from members’ conduct.  
  
G. Vishwanathan vs. Speaker, Tamil Nadu  
Legislative Assembly.  
  
Keisham Meghachandra Singh vs. Speaker  
Manipur Legislative Assembly & Others.  
  
Reduces accountability of government to  
Parliament.  
  
Qveremphasizes stability over accountability.  
Dilutes separation of powers, centralizes Cabinet  
control.  
  
Infringes members' powers, privileges and  
immunities in exercising their freedam of speech.  
No timeframe for Speaker's decision on  
disqualification.  
  
Challengers don't expect by-elections, giving the  
incumbent a clear head start.  
  
soe  
  
Law applies  
to both  
  
Parliament State Assemblies  
  
GROUNDS FOR DISQUALIFICATION  
  
A loses membership if they:  
  
Resign from Joinanother Vote or oppose  
their party party party direction  
  
Independent legislator Jj Nominated legislator  
  
If they join a po I | If they join a political  
  
party.  
  
‘es | party 6 months after  
K | becoming a legislator.  
  
EXCEPTIONS UNDER THE LAW  
  
A party can merge if The 91st CAA (2003) remo-  
two-thirds of | ved exemptions for splits,  
legislators consent. \_ allowing only mergers.  
  
No defection law for Presiding officer exempt if  
Presidential Poll they quit and rejoin after  
whip violations. | their term.  
  
POWERS TO DISQUALIFY  
  
The Chairman/Speaker decides disqualification,  
(subject to Judicial Review).  
  
Grounds for Review of Speaker's Decision:  
  
Laid bySc \_in\_, Shrimanth Balasaheb Patil VS  
  
—\_—\_ Honble Speaker Karnataka (2019)  
  
\* Violates constitutional mandate  
\* Made with malafide intent  
  
© Decision is perverse  
  
\* Fails to follow natural justice  
  
o  
  
resignations or defying whips.  
  
President/Governor should act on EC's  
advice for disqualification.  
  
Political parties could issue whips only  
when the government is at risk.  
  
Decisions under the 10th Schedule must  
follow EC's binding advice.  
  
Remove 10th Schedule exemption for  
party splits.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
31  
  
\=== PAGE 34 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Through which Constitutional Amendment Act was the Anti-Defection Law introduced?  
(a) 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1976 (b) 44th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1978  
(c) 52nd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1985 (d) 61st Constitutional Amendment Act, 1988  
  
The Anti-Defection Law is enshrined in which Schedule of the Indian Constitution?  
(a) 8th Schedule (b) 9th Schedule (c) 10th Schedule (d) 11th Schedule  
  
Under which Articles of the Constitution can a Legislator be disqualified on general grounds?  
(a) Articles 100(1) and 189(1) (b) Articles 102(1) and 191(1)  
(c) Articles 105(1) and 194(1) (d) Articles 110(1) and 199(1)  
  
A legislator is disqualified under the Anti-Defection Law if they voluntarily give up party membership. Which of the  
following is also a ground for disqualification?  
  
(a) Criticising the party leadership in public (b) Voting or abstaining contrary to the Party Whip  
  
(c) Contesting elections on a rival party's symbol (d) Failing to attend Parliament sessions regularly  
  
What is the exception to disqualification when a legislator votes against the Party Whip?  
(a) If the Supreme Court grants a stay  
  
(b) If prior permission is taken or the party condones the action within 15 days  
(c) If at least half the party members support the action  
(d) If the Speaker approves the deviation beforehand  
  
Who is the deciding authority for disqualification of members in the Lok Sabha under the Anti-Defection Law?  
(a) President of India (b) Supreme Court  
(c) Speaker of Lok Sabha (d) Election Commission of India  
  
Who decides disqualification petitions for members of the Rajya Sabha?  
(a) Vice President of India (b) Chairman of Rajya Sabha  
(c) Chief Justice of India (d) President of India  
  
An Independent Member becomes disqualified under the Anti-Defection Law if they:  
(a) Criticise government policy publicly (b) Join any political party after election  
(c) Vote against any bill in Parliament (d) Contest a by-election on a party ticket  
  
Under the Anti-Defection Law, a Nominated Member is disqualified if they join a political party after how many  
months of nomination?  
(a) 3 Months (b) 6 Months (c) 9 Months (d) 12 Months  
  
What fraction of members of a Legislature Party must agree for a valid merger under the Anti-Defection Law (after the  
91st CAA 2003)?  
(a) 1/2 (Simple Majority) —\_(b) 3/4 (Three-fourths) —\_(c) 2/3 (Two-thirds) (d) 1/3 (One-third)  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 32  
  
\=== PAGE 35 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
13\.  
  
14\.  
  
15\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
The 91st Constitutional Amendment Act 2003 removed which provision from the Anti-Defection Law?  
(a) The merger provision allowing 2/3rd members to merge  
  
(b) The split provision that allowed 1/3rd members to split without disqualification  
  
(c) The Speaker's power to decide disqualification petitions  
  
(d) Judicial review of the Speaker's decisions  
  
In the landmark case of Kihoto Hollohan vs Zachillhu (1992), what did the Supreme Court rule?  
(a) The Anti-Defection Law is unconstitutional  
  
(b) Speaker's decisions under the 10th Schedule are subject to Judicial Review  
  
(c) The merger clause should be scrapped  
(d) Disqualification decisions must be made within 3 months  
  
In Keisham Meghachandra Singh vs Speaker Manipur (2020), the Supreme Court ruled that decisions on  
disqualification should ideally be made within:  
(a) 1 Month (b) 2 Months (c) 3 Months (d) 6 Months  
  
What is one of the key issues with the Anti-Defection Law regarding the Speaker's role?  
(a) The Speaker has no power to disqualify members  
  
(b) Allegations of bias as the Speaker often belongs to the ruling party  
  
(c) The Speaker can only recommend disqualification to the President  
  
(d) The Speaker's decision cannot be challenged in any court  
  
How does the Anti-Defection Law curtail legislative freedom?  
  
(a) It bans MPs from speaking in Parliament without party approval  
  
(b) It restricts MPs/MLAs from voting independently and expressing dissent in the legislature  
(c) It prevents MPs from joining parliamentary committees  
  
(d) It bars MPs from raising private member bills  
  
Dear Lpt’ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic and.valuable material by putting in lot  
of time, effort, energy and mon ake you s ful and it would not  
be fe someone else get it by  
And they will c: ompetition f  
  
prep. To pre unfair i igilant and inform us if you find  
anybody copying (in any form) it or teaching from it.  
  
Unauthorised) copying or usage of Law Prep material is illegal and  
punishable\*by imprisonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
Copyright Act of 1957.  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
suggestions/feedback/complaints/compliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow B@O@ 33  
  
\=== PAGE 36 ===  
/"S May 2026  
  
. =, TOPIC  
. “inNEWS  
  
INDIA'S FOREX  
STRESS & CALL FOR  
ECONOMIC AUSTERITY  
  
Why in News?  
  
Prime Minister urged citizens to Reduce Non — Essential Spending on Gold Purchases, Overseas Travel and Fuel  
  
Consumption amid growing concerns over India's Foreign Exchange Reserves.  
India's Forex Reserves declined by nearly USD 38 Billion within 2 Months, falling to around USD 691 Billion by May 2026.  
  
66  
  
Foreign Exchange Reserves, which plummeted to roughly USD 691 Billion by May 2026. This decline was  
  
Cliffs Notes /  
  
Indian Government is advocating for Economic Austerity following a significant drop in its  
  
primarily triggered by volatile oil prices, record-breaking gold imports and active market intervention by  
central bank to defend weakening rupee.  
  
Consequently, Prime Minister has encouraged public to limit discretionary spending on foreign travel and  
luxury goods to curb capital outflows. While these measures aim to provide currency stability and manage  
inflation, experts caution that overly strict controls could stifle manufacturing and broader economic growth.  
  
Ultimately, Strategy balances immediate need for financial security against long-term health of Nation's  
  
Industrial Sectors.  
BoP  
i 1  
Current Account Capital Account  
|  
{ 1 { 1 1  
Merchandise Invisibles Foreign Investment Loan Banking Capital  
(Exports & Imports (FDI, FPI) (ECB) (NRI deposits)  
of goods)  
{ 1 1  
Services Factor Income Transfers  
(Banking, Telecom, etc) 1. Employee 1. Gifts  
Compensation 2. Grants  
2\. Investment 3. Remittances  
  
Income  
(Profit, Interest, divident  
on the assets abroad)  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 34  
  
\=== PAGE 37 ===  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Economics  
  
Current Macroeconomic Situation  
  
1\. Declining Foreign Exchange Reserves: Forex Reserves have fallen to around USD 690.69 Billion (May 2026).  
  
e Reason: Intervention by Reserve Bank of India to Stabilise Rupee, Absorb Liquidity Shocks, Reduce Excessive  
Exchange Rate Volatility.  
  
e Implication: Reduced Buffer Against External Shocks and Higher Sensitivity to Global Capital Flow Fluctuations.  
2\. Widening Current Account Deficit  
  
e India faces a Twin Import Burden: Energy Imports and Non — Essential Imports (Gold, Travel, etc.)  
  
e — Impact: Persistent CAD due to Inelastic Import Demand and Increased Dependence on External Financing.  
3\. Crude Oil Vulnerability: India imports around 89% of its Crude Oil Requirement.  
  
e Every USD 1 increase in Oil Price = USD 1.5 — 2 Billion rise in Import Bill.  
  
e Impact: Higher Fiscal Pressure, Imported Inflation, Worsening Trade Balance  
4\. Rising Gold Imports: India is 2" Largest Gold Consumer globally after China.  
  
e Gold accounts for nearly USD 71.98 Billion (9% of Total Imports).  
  
e Unlike Sovereign Reserves, Household Gold Imports do not add to Productive Capacity and Directly worsen CAD.  
5\. High Outflows under Liberalised Remittance Scheme: Significant  
  
Foreign Exchange Outflows recorded. Over 50% Spending on Foreign Surging value of gold imports  
Travel and Overseas Weddings.  
IMPORTS | QUANTITY  
  
e Impact: Accelerates Capital Outflow puts pressure on Forex ($BN) (TONNES)  
Reserves and Weakens External Account Stability. | | |  
6\. Fiscal Stress from Energy and Input Costs: Oil Marketing Companies | FY26 71.97 721.04  
under Recoveries estimated at 730000 Crore per month due to Frozen FY25 58.00 757.09  
Retail Fuel Prices. FY24 | 45.54 \] 795.32  
e Fertiliser Shock: Imported Inputs like Urea and Ammonia Prices  
  
FY23 35.01 678.30  
FY22 46.16 879.04  
  
have doubled.  
  
e Fiscal Dilemma: Passing Costs \> Inflation Risk | Absorbing  
  
Costs — Fiscal Deficit Risk SOURCE: COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY MINISTRY  
7\. Imported Inflation Cycle: Rupee Depreciation — Higher Import Cost  
— Domestic Price Rise Gold import in FY26 had  
i 9  
¢ Key Imports Affected: Crude Oil, Electronics, Fertilisers jumped by nearly 25% to  
  
$71.97 billion. reuTERS  
  
¢ Outcome: Sustained Inflationary Pressure in economy  
  
Why is India Calling for Austerity?  
Managing CAD and Rupee Stability: Reducing Non = Essential Imports helps conserve Foreign Exchange.  
  
Demand — side Behavioural Measures: Measures suggested such as Work — From — Home Adoption, Carpooling  
and Virtual Meetings to Reduce Fuel Consumption and Lower Import Dependence on Crude Oil  
  
Energy vs Food Security Trade — Off: Surging Fertiliser Prices force Policy Shift, Government prioritises Food  
Security over Discretionary Fuel Consumption.  
  
Containing Capital Flight: To curb Capital Flight and Reduce Foreign Exchange Outflows.  
  
Enhancing Strategic Autonomy: Shift in approach from Supply — side Diversification to Demand — side Restraint.  
Goal: Reduce Dependence on Volatile Regions, Lower “Energy — to — GDP Sensitivity” and Strengthen Resilience  
against Global Shocks.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 35  
  
\=== PAGE 38 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Economics  
  
How Excessive Forex Conservation Can Affect Growth?  
  
\-e Impact on Manufacturing: Indian Industry depends on Imported Capital Goods, Semiconductors and Raw  
Materials. Restricted Imports \> Lower Industrial Output and Exports.  
  
e — Protectionism Trap: Import Restrictions increase Input Costs, thereby reducing Competitiveness of Exports.  
  
e Foreign Investment Concerns: Capital Control concerns Raise Country Risk Premium, potentially Dampening  
Foreign Direct and Portfolio Investment Inflows.  
  
Foreign Exchange Reserves  
  
Forex Reserves and Rupee Exchange Rate  
| @ When Inflows Exceed Outflows: A Surplus in  
Balance of Payments strengthens Forex Reserves  
¢ Components of Forex Reserves and supports Rupee Stability.  
  
e Foreign Exchange Reserves are External Assets  
maintained by Reserve Bank of India.  
  
o Foreign Currency Assets ¢ When Outflows Rise: Sharp Increases in Imports  
  
or Declining Foreign Investments can lead to  
o GoldReserves — .  
Reduction in Forex Reserves and Depreciation of  
  
o Special Drawing Rights Rupee  
o Reserve Position with International Monetary e Inflationary Impact: Weaker Rupee raises Cost of  
Fund Imports. This contributes to imported Inflation and  
External Sector Stress.  
  
India’s Forex Reserves: The Pillars of Economic Resilience  
  
Ensures uninterrupted access to critical goods like CURRENCHSTABILITY, SCONE DENCE External Shocks  
—  
———\_)  
  
crude oil, fertilisers, and industrial machinery. Acts as a shield against global financial  
instability and sudden capital outflows.  
  
ee  
\=—S\>»  
Manufacturing '  
Funds Electronics and  
4 Industrial Machinery / .  
Consumer Goods a  
Facilitates Gold and  
Edible Oil wt: .  
sea ld . Enhancing Investor Confidence  
Signals strong external payment capacity to global  
Stabilising the Rupee investors, reinforcing macroeconomic stability  
Enables the RBI to mitigate currency volatility  
during periods of intense market turbulence.  
purren  
a  
| a — :  
  
FOREX RESERVES: ECONOMIC BUFFER & STRATEGIC ASSET  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 36  
  
\=== PAGE 39 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Economics — Tutorial =  
on ee ee wer Tawpreptutorial.com  
  
The Economic Ripple Effect:  
Risks of Suppressing  
Consumption in India  
  
The Failure of Import  
Substitution  
  
Historical attempts to reduce  
dependence resulted in low  
industrial competitiveness and  
inefficiency.  
  
Threat to  
  
Aggregate Demand  
Private consumption is a major  
GDP component; reducing it  
weakens overall economic  
growth.  
  
(\>)  
. Reduced FDI  
Discouraged : Attractiveness  
Business Expansion x s mae :  
Foreign investors avoid  
Weak consumer demand r economies lacking strong  
; directly pais businesses . Private Consumer domestic demand and high  
rom making fresh investments yp 7 : Spendin: growth potential.  
and expanding production. pending ne  
  
The Inefficiency Trap  
  
Suppressing consumption  
mirrors past strategies that led to  
slower-than-expected economic  
development.  
  
Employment  
Contraction fs  
  
Lower production activity leads to  
significantly reduced job creation  
opportunities across all sectors.  
  
Economic Impact of Excessive Gold Imports  
  
e Pressure on Current Account Deficit: Gold is a Major Non — Essential Import Item. High Gold Imports widen Trade Deficit,  
particularly when Crude Oil Prices are also elevated.  
o ALarger CAD increases dependence on Foreign Capital Inflows.  
e — Stress on Foreign Exchange Reserves: Increased Gold Imports require Larger Outflows of US Dollars.  
o This reduces Ability of Reserve Bank of India to stabilise Rupee during external shocks.  
e Rupee Depreciation: Higher Dollar demand for Gold and Oil Imports weakens Rupee.  
co ADepreciating Rupee further raises Import Costs and Fuels Inflationary Pressures.  
  
e Imported Inflation: Rising International Prices of Gold and Crude Oil contribute to Imported Inflation.  
  
Skill — Up: Liberalised Remittance Scheme, Current Account Deficit, PLI Schemes  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 37  
  
\=== PAGE 40 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Economics  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
To approximately what level did India's Forex Reserves fall by May 2026?  
(a) USD 500 Billion (b) USD 620 Billion (c) USD 691 Billion (d) USD 750 Billion  
  
Which of the following was NOT cited as a primary trigger for the decline in India's Forex Reserves?  
(a) Volatile oil prices (b) Record-breaking gold imports  
(c) RBI's market intervention to defend the rupee (d) A sharp decline in IT service exports  
  
India is the world's largest gold consumer globally.  
(a) Largest (1st) (b) 2nd Largest (c) 3rd Largest (d) 4th Largest  
  
Gold imports account for approximately what percentage of India's total imports?  
(a) 3% (b) 5% (c) 9% (d) 14%  
  
Why do household gold imports worsen India's Current Account Deficit (CAD)?  
  
(a) Gold imports attract heavy GST, increasing fiscal deficit  
  
(b) Unlike sovereign reserves, household gold imports do not add to productive capacity  
(c) Gold imports reduce the supply of foreign currency in domestic markets  
  
(d) Gold imports directly reduce India's GDP growth rate  
  
What is the 'Fiscal Dilemma' described in the context of energy and input costs?  
(a) Choosing between increasing taxes or reducing subsidies  
  
(b) Passing costs leads to inflation risk; absorbing costs leads to fiscal deficit risk  
(c) Balancing defence spending against social welfare spending  
  
(d) Deciding between export promotion and import substitution  
  
What is the Imported Inflation Cycle’ described in the document?  
  
(a) Rising domestic prices — currency depreciation — reduced exports  
  
(b) Rupee depreciation — higher import cost — domestic price rise  
  
(c) Higher interest rates — reduced investment — lower output — inflation  
(d) Excess money supply — demand pull inflation — import surge  
  
How can excessive forex conservation negatively impact Indian manufacturing?  
  
(a) It reduces domestic consumption, shrinking the market for manufacturers  
  
(b) Indian industry depends on imported capital goods and raw materials; restricted imports lower industrial output  
(c) It increases the cost of borrowing for manufacturers through higher interest rates  
  
(d) It forces manufacturers to shift production overseas  
  
What is the 'Protectionism Trap' in the context of excessive forex conservation?  
  
(a) Excessive tariffs leading to WTO disputes and trade sanctions  
  
(b) Import restrictions increase input costs, reducing the competitiveness of exports  
(c) Domestic companies become dependent on government subsidies  
  
(d) Foreign companies exit the Indian market, reducing competition  
  
Which of the following is NOT a component of India's Foreign Exchange Reserves?  
(a) Foreign Currency Assets (b) Gold Reserves  
(c) Special Drawing Rights (d) Domestic Government Securities  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 38  
  
\=== PAGE 41 ===  
fo. May 2026  
\=. TOPIC  
  
\[Good situation Satisfactory situation \_™ Noticeable problems  
i Difficult situation "il Very serious situation  
  
Highest Ranked:  
92.72 Norway  
88.92 Netherlands  
  
aie WORLD PRESS  
. INDEX 2026  
  
Why in News?  
Reporters Without Borders (RSF) Releases World Press Freedom Index 2026 (24th Edition), evaluating Media Freedom in  
180 Countries based on Legal Protections, Media Diversity and Political Interference.  
  
Global Press Freedom declines as Majority of Countries (52.2%) face 'Difficult' or 'Very Serious' Conditions for Journalism.  
  
World Press Freedom Index  
  
e Type: Annual Report (Since 2002)  
  
e Published By: Reporters Without Borders (Reporters Sans Frontiers) Reporters Without Borders  
  
e Ranks 180 Countries and Regions according to Level of Freedom \_¢ Foundedin: 1985  
  
available to Journalists based on an Evaluation of Pluralism, e Type: Non-Profit Organisation  
  
Independence of Media, Quality of Legislative Framework and Safety of  
  
e Aim: Safeguarding Right to Freedom  
Journalists in Each Country and Region. 3 of Information. :  
HQ: Paris (France)  
  
e Press Freedom Questionnaire covers 5 Categories: Political Context,  
  
Legal Framework, Economic Context, Socio— Cultural Context, Security.  
  
e Each Country gets a score from 0 (Worst) to 100 (Best).  
  
Key Findings Extra Shots  
e Global Press Freedom shrinks dramatically as Only 1% of Population : ¢ 16° Nov is celebrated as National  
Lives in Countries rated 'Good' for Journalism. Press Day. :  
»e 2026 UNESCO Guillermo Cano :  
¢ Global Press Freedoms classified as in “Difficult Situation”. i :  
  
: World Press Freedom Prize awarded :  
o Legal Indicator saw Sharpest Decline, due to Criminalisation of : to Sudanese Journalists Syndicate for |  
  
Journalism and Misuse of Laws. Press Freedom.  
  
e Top—Ranked Countries: Norway (10" Consecutive Year) \>  
Netherlands \> Estonia \> Denmark \> Sweden. World Press Freedom Day  
  
Observed on May 3, since 1993.  
  
o In honour of Windhoek Declaration 1991  
  
(Namibia) for Development of a Free,  
Independent and Pluralistic Press  
  
e¢ Bottom — Ranked Countries: Eritrea \< North Korea \<  
China \< Iran \< Saudi Arabia.  
  
e Middle East and North Africa remained Most Dangerous  
Region for Journalists.  
  
Theme 2026 — Shaping a Future at Peace:  
Promoting Press Freedom for Human Rights,  
Development, and Security  
  
o Syria (141") registered Sharpest Rise in Press Freedom  
Rankings after Political Transition, while United States  
falls to 64" Place.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 39  
  
\=== PAGE 42 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
o Niger (120") suffered Steepest Ranking Fall due to Military Rule and Armed Group Violence in Sahel.  
India's Ranking: India ranked 157" witha score of 31.96 (Very Serious) in 2026, from 151“ in 2025.  
  
Challenges to Media Freedom  
  
e = Financial Instability: Media in 160 of 180 Countries facing Financial Instability, Threatening Independent  
i and Unbiased Reporting.  
e Political Instability: Political Instability linked to Decline in Media Freedom Across Affected Countries.  
  
Significance of Press Freedom  
  
“Where the Press is Free, and Every Man able to Read, Allis Safe.” — Thomas Jefferson  
  
Ensuring Independence of Press: Freedom of Expression is vital to preserve Journalistic Integrity and prevent Undue  
  
Influence from State or Private Actors.  
  
o AFree Press acts Independently, Promoting Transparency and holding Powerful Accountable.  
  
Voice of Voiceless: Press serves as a Bridge between Governed and Governing, especially for Marginalized Communities.  
  
o Highlights Systemic Injustices and gives Visibility to those without institutional power.  
  
A Pillar of Democracy: Often called "4" Pillar of Democracy", complementing: Legislature, Judiciary, Executive.  
  
o Press enables Public Participation in Democratic Discourse through Information, Critique and Civic Dialogue.  
  
Catalyst for Debate, Discussion & Reform: Sparks Public Debate, a Precursor to Legislative and Social Reform.  
  
o News Coverage can influence Parliamentary and Legislative Discussions.  
  
Strengthening Grassroots Democracy: Community Journalism promotes Social Cohesion, Local Accountability, Political  
  
Activism.  
  
o Hyperlocal Issues gain visibility through Grassroots Platforms, especially with rise of Social Media — based Citizen  
Journalism.  
  
Role During Emergencies: During pandemic, Media became a Critical Communication Tool between Government and  
  
Citizens.  
  
o ©ASource of Life— Saving Information on Health, Lockdowns, Vaccination and Public Advisories.  
  
o Enabled Public Awareness, Reduced Panic and Fought Misinformation.  
  
Indian Constitution & Press Freedom  
  
Freedom of Press has been treated as part of Freedom of Speech and Expression guaranteed by Article 19 (1) (a) of  
  
Constitution. :  
  
o However, as mentioned in Article 19 (2), Reasonable Restrictions can be placed on this right, in Interest of  
  
Sovereignty and Integrity of India, Security of State, Public Order, Decency or Morality or in relation to  
Contempt of Court, Defamation or Incitement to Offence.  
  
o Hence, Freedom of Media is Not an Absolute Freedom.  
  
In 1950, Supreme Court in Romesh Thappar vs State of Madras observed that Freedom of Press lay at  
Foundation of All Democratic Organisations.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 40  
  
\=== PAGE 43 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices — Tutorial —  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
History of Freedom of Press in India  
Portuguese established Printing Press at Goa in 1557.  
East India Company established its 1" Printing Press in 1674 in Bombay.  
India's I" Newspaper, James Augustus Hickey's Bengal Gazette, Published in 1780.  
Censorship of Press Act 1799 issued by Lord Wellesley to curb French Propaganda Against British Rule.  
  
Sambad Kaumudi (1821): Raja Rammohan Roy, Pioneer of Nationalist Journalism, Founded Bengali Weekly  
to Champion Social Reform.  
  
Mirat — ul — Akhbar (1822): Raja Rammohan Roy Launched India's 1" Persian Weekly.  
  
Bombay Samachar (1822): India's Oldest Running Vernacular Newspaper Founded by Parsi Scholar  
Fardoonji Murazban.  
  
Metcalfe's Press Act 1835 (Liberator of Indian Press)  
  
Vernacular Press Act of 1878 (Proposed by Lord Lytton) enacted to Suppress Indian Press Freedom and  
Criticism of British Rule.  
  
Bodies Associated with Press Freedom in India  
  
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (Ashwini Vaishnaw) Frames Media Policies and Guidelines in  
India.  
Press Council of India (Chair — Justice Ranjana Prakash Desai): Established in 1978 as a Statutory Quasi —  
Judicial Body Under Press Council Act 1978.  
o Watchdog to Uphold Press Freedom and Ethical Journalism Standards.  
  
" Initially Established in 1966 under Indian Press Council Act, 1965.  
  
\= Abolished in 1975 during Emergency After Repeal of 1965 Act  
Editors Guild of India (1978, President — Anant Nath): Defends Press Freedom, Upholds Journalists' Rights  
and Responsibilities Through Leading Editors' Collective.  
  
I" Press Commission (1956) advocated for Autonomous Body to Safeguard Press Freedom and Ethical  
  
Journalism.  
QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
  
Gir National Park in Gujarat hosted launch of 'Lion' Species Spotlight Programme by Bhupender Yadav as a  
pre-event to International Big Cat Alliance Summit 2026.  
  
o Gir National Park: World's Only Natural Habitat of Asiatic Lion located in Gujarat.  
o \_Barda Wildlife Sanctuary is being developed as a Secondary Habitat.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ Al  
  
\=== PAGE 44 ===  
THE BIGGEST CLAT EVENT OF THE YEAR  
  
CLAT 2027  
v  
  
28" JUNE 2026 2 DOUBT CLEARING SESSION + AIOM  
  
LIMITED SEATS (REGISTER NOW)  
  
\=== PAGE 45 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Which organisation publishes the World Press Freedom Index?  
(a) UNESCO (b) Reporters Without Borders  
(c) Committee to Protect Journalists (d) Freedom House  
  
In which year was Reporters Without Borders (RSF) founded?  
(a) 1975 (b) 1980 (c) 1985 (d) 1990  
  
Where is the Headquarters of Reporters Without Borders located?  
(a) Geneva, Switzerland (b) New York, USA (c) Brussels, Belgium (d) Paris, France  
  
The World Press Freedom Index 2026 is which edition of the report?  
(a) 20th Edition (b) 22nd Edition (c) 24th Edition (d) 26th Edition  
  
How many countries are evaluated in the World Press Freedom Index?  
(a) 120 (b) 150 (c) 165 (d) 180  
  
The Press Freedom Questionnaire covers which 5 categories?  
  
(a) Economic, Social, Political, Cultural, Military  
  
(b) Political Context, Legal Framework, Economic Context, Socio-Cultural Context, Security  
(c) Governance, Transparency, Diversity, Safety, Technology  
  
(d) Independence, Pluralism, Access, Ethics, Infrastructure  
  
What is the scoring range used for each country in the World Press Freedom Index?  
(a) 0 (Best) to 100 (Worst) (b) 1 to 10, with 10 being worst  
(c) 0 (Worst) to 100 (Best) (d) -100 to +100  
  
What percentage of countries face 'Difficult’ or 'Very Serious' conditions for journalism?  
(a) 32.5% (b) 42.8% (c) 52.2% (d) 61.4%  
  
Which country topped the World Press Freedom Index 2026 for the 10th consecutive year?  
(a) Sweden (b) Denmark (c) Estonia (d) Norway  
  
Which of the following is the correct order of the top-ranked countries in the 2026 Index?  
(a) Norway \> Sweden \> Denmark \> Netherlands \> Estonia  
  
(b) Norway \> Netherlands \> Estonia \> Denmark \> Sweden  
  
(c) Denmark \> Norway \> Sweden \> Finland \> Estonia  
  
(d) Netherlands \> Norway \> Estonia \> Sweden \> Denmark  
  
Which country ranked last (bottom) in the World Press Freedom Index 2026?  
  
(a) North Korea (b) China (c) Iran (d) Eritrea  
  
What was India's rank and score in the World Press Freedom Index 2026?  
(a) 151st with a score of 41.5 (b) 151st with a score of 35.2 Elta\]  
(c) 157th with a score of 31.96 (d) 157th with a score of 28.4  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 43  
  
\=== PAGE 46 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices  
  
13\. | World Press Freedom Day is observed on which date?  
(a) March 21 (b) April 7 (c) May 3 (d) November 16  
  
14\. | Under which Article of the Indian Constitution is Freedom of Press protected?  
(a) Article 14 (b) Article 16 (c) Article 19(1)(a) (d) Article 21  
  
15\. India's first newspaper, Bengal Gazette, was published in which year and by whom?  
  
(a) 1765 by Robert Clive (b) 1780 by James Augustus Hickey  
(c) 1821 by Raja Rammohan Roy (d) 1822 by Fardoonji Murazban  
  
W- QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
  
e Mission Drishti, developed by GalaxEye, launched aboard SpaceX Falcon 9.  
  
© Mission Drishti: World's 1“ OptoSAR technology Satellite integrating Electro — Optical Imaging and  
Synthetic Aperture Radar; enabling All — Weather, Day — and — Night Earth Observation on a Single  
Platform.  
e ISRO received 2026 Goddard Astronautics Award from American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics  
for Chandrayaan — 3.  
o Award is named after Robert H. Goddard (Father of Modern Rocketry).  
  
e Blue Moon MK1, also known as “Endurance,” is an Unmanned Lunar Cargo Lander developed by Blue  
Origin in partnership with NASA.  
  
Ws: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
‘I Defence  
  
e 1" edition of PRAGATI (Partnership of Regional Armies for Growth and Transformation in Indian Ocean  
Region) held at Umroi, Meghalaya.  
  
o ©Multinational Indian Army Exercise involving India and 12 IOR Partner Countries.  
  
e Vayu Astra — | successfully completed High — Altitude Endurance Flight Trials above 14,000 Feet in  
Uttarakhand.  
o Indigenous Kamikaze Drone Vayu Astra-1, developed by Pune — based Nibe Limited.  
  
e Indian Navy has inducted INS Mahendragiri, 6" Stealth Frigate under Project 17A, built by Mazagon Dock  
Shipbuilders Limited.  
  
e Triacetone Triperoxide, commonly referred to as “Mother of Satan,” was reportedly used in Vehicle — borne  
IED involved in 2025 Red Fort Blast 2025.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 44  
  
\=== PAGE 47 ===  
ie “May 2026  
  
‘gs, TOPIC  
DF inNEWS  
  
LEADS 2025  
REPORT  
  
Why in News?  
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (Ministry of Commerce and Industry) released 7th LEADS 2025  
Report and conferred 4th LEAPS Awards 2025 to recognise excellence and innovation in India's Logistics Sector.  
  
Initiatives support PM GatiShakti and National Logistics Policy 2022.  
  
Key Highlights of LEADS 2025  
  
ie Revised Performance Classification: 2025 edition introduced a 4 — tier Classification System replacing earlier :  
3 — Tier Model.  
  
New Categories: Exemplars, High Performers, Accelerators, Growth — Seekers  
  
LEADS  
  
e LEADS stands for Logistics Ease Across Different States.  
  
e Launched in 2018. LEAPS Awards 2025  
  
e India's National Index benchmarking Logistics Performance across = ¢ \[EAPS stands for Logistics Excellence, :  
States and UTs of India. Advancement and Performance Shield.  
o Draws inspiration from World Bank's Logistics Performance Index. e Recognise Innovation, Industry  
  
sr oe Leadershi d Outstanding:  
e Evaluates States and UTs across Key Logistics Parameters: Logistics ca ers ‘pan \_. UESTanaing :  
Contributions to Logistics and Supply |  
  
Infrastructure, Service Quality, Regulatory Environment, Operational Chain Development.  
  
Efficiency, Data—driven Logistics Reforms. . oe i  
y 8 e Presented across 13 Logistics — related |  
  
e — Prepared By: Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade Categories.  
  
(Ministry of Commerce and Industry)  
  
State Performance in LEADS 2025  
  
e = Exemplars (4): Tamil Nadu (Coastal), Uttar Pradesh (Landlocked), Mizoram (N—E), Delhi (UTs)  
  
o -UPachieved highest “Exemplar” status after being categorised as an “Achiever” from 2022-2024.  
e = High Performers (11): Gujarat (Coastal), Haryana (Landlocked), Tripura (N—E), J\&K (UTs)  
  
o =J\&K improved from “Fast Mover” in 2024 to “High Performer” in 2025.  
e Accelerators (17): Andhra Pradesh (Coastal), Punjab (Landlocked), Nagalan (N — E), Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
  
& Daman and Diu (UTs) i  
¢ Growth — Seekers (4): West Bengal (Coastal), Rajasthan (Landlocked), Sikkim (N — E), Andaman and Nicobar  
Islands (UTs).  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 45  
  
\=== PAGE 48 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices  
  
Initiatives to strengthen Logistics Sector  
  
e National Logistics Policy 2022: Aims to Lower Cost of Logistics in;  
par with Other Developed Countries. India's Export Performance and Logistics  
\_ e Logistics Costs in India remain relatively  
high at around 7.97% of GDP.  
e India recorded Exports of $ 863 Billion in  
FY 2025-26.  
o Settarget of $ 1 Trillion for Current Year.  
  
e =PM GatiShakti National Master Plan 2021: Promotes Integrated  
Infrastructure Planning by improving coordination between Roads,  
Railways, Ports, Airports and Logistics Networks to strengthen  
Multimodal Connectivity and Reduce Transportation Delays.  
  
e Logistic Efficiency Enhancement Programme: Enhance Freight | e Services Exports recorded growth of 8.5—9%. |  
Speed, Reduces Costs and Improves Tracking through \* :  
  
Technological and Infrastructure Upgrades.  
e —Bharatmala Pariyojana: Aims to Improve Road Connectivity across India.  
e Sagarmala Programme: Focuses on Port— led Development and boosts Coastal Shipping Efficiency.  
  
e E-Way Bill System: Mandates Digital Bills for Goods over =50000, easing Inter — State Transport.  
  
Logistics Performance Index  
ie Analyses differences between Countries in terms of Customs Procedures, Logistics Costs and Quality of:  
Infrastructure for Overland and Maritime Transport. :  
  
e 6 Key Dimensions: Customs Performance, Infrastructure Quality, Ease of Arranging Shipments, Logistics  
Services Quality, Consignments Tracking and Tracing and Timeliness of Shipments as well as Practical Data ‘  
measuring Logistics Efficiency. :  
  
© © Indiaranked38" among 139 Countries in World Bank's Logistics Performance Index Report 2023.  
  
Reported by World Bank every 2 Years.  
  
QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
Organisation  
  
e Saudi Arabia joined International Big Cat Alliance as 26" Member.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 46  
  
\=== PAGE 49 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices \[= Tutorial = “|  
  
Lv Pee? DEDICATED FREIGHT CORRIDORS &  
  
BESS eee eee SSeS eee SSeS SSS eeeS a  
  
Exclusive freight tracks, Under Ministry of Implementing Agency Objective  
  
features double-stack, Railways Dedicated Freight Reduce logistics costs  
heavy-haul trains for Z Corridor Corporation of below 10% as per the  
  
high capacity and speed ” India (DFCCIL) National Logistics Policy.  
  
WS y 7  
Western Dedicated mae Corridor (WDFC) Eastern Dedicated 7 Corridor (EDFC)  
  
JNPT Rajasthan . Uttar Pradesh Jharkhand  
(Mumbai) = Oc Ie , Dadri Sahnewal © Q@\_\_, Dankuni  
6 o Ae (Punjab). \~\~S 6 (WB)  
Gujarat Haryana Haryana Bihar  
rt) Handles textiles, chemicals, & industrial products. e Focusing on coal, steel, and agricultural products.  
@ Funded by @ Funded by the  
  
Foundation EDFC is operational,  
  
forEDFC and =and WDFCis | Khurja - Dadri (46 km)  
  
WDFC was complete, set to finish :  
  
laid in . by December 2025. sahneyal As per the National Rail Plan, DFCs aim to  
  
boost rail freight's share to 45% by 2030.  
  
(938 km)  
  
i Sanand(N) - Makarpura |  
(138 km)  
  
s  
%  
  
as Dankuni  
PY ¢ Bhusawal aN “ Kharagpur  
(Saphale) , oie ,  
zu  
  
a)  
  
i Makarpura - Vaitarna  
(Saphale) (328 km  
  
| Vaitarna(Saphale) - Vierwoda :  
JNPT (102 km)  
  
North-South DFC (Vijaywada - Itarsi) 975 Km  
East Coast DFC (Kharagpur - Vijayawada) 1115 km  
  
East-West Sub Corridor- | (Palgarh - Dankuri)  
2073 Km  
  
East-West Sub Corridor- II (Rajkharsawan -  
  
((: SIGNIFICANCE OF oFCs } rig oad  
  
anna MR ss CHALLENGES on  
  
WDFC has improved port access & lowered transit times. Delays in completing final section  
  
of WDFC resulting in an additional  
  
© Lower logistics costs, supporting industries' competitiveness.  
7\. in project costs.  
  
© Generated jobs and attracted investments, aiding economic growth.  
  
() Contributed to Indian Railways’ revenue growth (FY 2018-19 to FY 2022-23).  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 47  
  
\=== PAGE 50 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
What does LEADS stand for?  
(a) Logistics Evaluation and Development System (b) Logistics Ease Across Different States  
(c) Logistics Efficiency and Data Standards (d) Logistics Enhancement Across Domestic Sectors  
  
Which Ministry/Department prepares the LEADS Report?  
(a) Ministry of Shipping and Ports  
  
(b) Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
  
(c) Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade  
(d) Ministry of Railways  
  
In which year was the LEADS Index launched?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2016 (c) 2017 (d) 2018  
  
The LEADS 2025 Report is which edition of the report?  
(a) Sth Edition (b) 6th Edition (c) 7th Edition (d) 8th Edition  
  
The LEADS Index draws inspiration from which international index?  
(a) IMF Global Competitiveness Index (b) World Bank's Logistics Performance Index  
(c) UNCTAD Trade Facilitation Index (d) WEF Global Trade Enablement Index  
  
The LEADS 2025 edition introduced a 4-tier classification system replacing the earlier how many tier model?  
(a) 2-Tier Model (b) 3-Tier Model (c) 5-Tier Model (d) 6-Tier Model  
  
What are the four new categories introduced in the LEADS 2025 classification system?  
(a) Leaders, Achievers, Performers, Aspirants  
  
(b) Champions, Innovators, Developers, Beginners  
  
(c) Exemplars, High Performers, Accelerators, Growth-Seekers  
  
(d) Pioneers, Frontrunners, Movers, Laggards  
  
What does LEAPS stand for?  
  
(a) Logistics Excellence, Advancement and Performance Shield  
(b) Logistics Evaluation and Achievement Performance System  
(c) Logistics Efficiency, Advancement and Progress Shield  
  
(d) Logistics Enablement and Performance Standards  
  
The LEAPS Awards 2025 were the which edition of the awards?  
(a) 2nd Edition (b) 3rd Edition (c) 4th Edition (d) Sth Edition  
  
Which state achieved 'Exemplar' status in LEADS 2025 under the Landlocked category after being categorised as an  
'Achiever' from 2022-2024?  
(a) Haryana (b) Rajasthan (c) Punjab (d) Uttar Pradesh  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 48  
  
\=== PAGE 51 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Summits, Reports, Indices  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
13\.  
  
14\.  
  
15\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Which of the following is correctly matched as an Exemplar state and its category in LEADS 2025?  
(a) Gujarat — Coastal (b) Tamil Nadu — Coastal  
(c) Haryana — Landlocked (d) Tripura — North-East  
  
Which Union Territory improved from 'Fast Mover' in 2024 to 'High Performer’ in LEADS 2025?  
(a) Delhi (b) Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Daman and Diu  
(c) Jammu & Kashmir (d) Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
  
Which state/UT falls under the 'Growth-Seekers' category for the Coastal region in LEADS 2025?  
(a) Andhra Pradesh (b) Tamil Nadu (c) Gujarat (d) West Bengal  
  
Which programme focuses on port-led development and boosting coastal shipping efficiency?  
(a) Bharatmala Pariyojana (b) PM GatiShakti  
(c) Sagarmala Programme (d) LEAPS Programme  
  
India ranked at what position among 139 countries in the World Bank's Logistics Performance Index 2023?  
(a) 22" (b) 30" (c) 38" (d) 44"  
  
A: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
‘I Person in News  
  
e Sabastian Kimaru Sawe (Kenya | Nickname: The Silent Assassin) created history at London Marathon 2026  
by becoming 1“ Athlete to complete Official Marathon under Two Hours (1:59:30), breaking previous  
record of Kelvin Kiptum (2:00:35).  
  
o London Marathon 2026 earned Guinness World Records recognition as Largest Marathon Event ever  
held.  
  
e Parveen Shaikh and Barkha Subba won Whitley Awards 2026 for protecting Indian Skimmer and  
Himalayan Salamander.  
o \~©Whitley Awards conferred by Whitley Fund for Nature, known as “Green Oscars”, recognising  
Grassroots Conservation Leaders from Global South.  
o Indian Winners (Previous): Purnima Devi Barman (2024), Y Nuklu Phom (2021), Vivek Menon (2001,  
  
1“ Indian Winner).  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 49  
  
\=== PAGE 52 ===  
0 May 2026  
  
TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
NATIONAL  
TECHNOLOGY  
DAY 2026  
  
Why in News?  
National Technology Day 2026 Observed on 11th May with Theme “Responsible Innovation for Inclusive Growth”.  
  
Key Highlights of LEADS 2025  
  
: e Revised Performance Classification: 2025 edition introduced a 4 — tier Classification System replacing earlier :  
  
3 — Tier Model.  
  
New Categories: Exemplars, Hi.  
  
h Performers, Accelerators, Growth — Seekers  
  
National Technology Day  
  
e Inception of National Technology Day dates back to May 11, 1998 to commemorate major technological achievements on  
11" May 1998:  
  
o Pokhran—II Nuclear Tests (Operation Shakti) mark India's Emergence as a Nuclear Weapons State.  
o Hansa—3 Aircraft completes Ist Successful Test Flight, marking milestone in Indigenous Aviation.  
  
o DRDO successfully Test Fires Trishul Short — Range Surface —  
to—Air Missile.  
  
Technology Development Board  
  
o The then Prime Minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, declared May 11 ¢ Type: Statutory Body (Technology  
  
as National Technology Day. : Development Board Act, 1995)  
  
© Declared by PM Atal Bihari Vajpayee in 1998 and Observed annually ° + Objective: To promote Development and  
  
as National Technology Day from 1999 onward. Commercialization of Indigenous  
Technology & Adaptation of Imported  
Technology for Wider Application.  
  
e Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar Awards: India's Science Honors  
  
comparable to Padma Awards, announced annually on National  
  
Technology Day.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 50  
  
\=== PAGE 53 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days — Tutorial —  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
On this day in 1998, India conducted Pokhran-ll, celebrated as National Technology Day  
  
WHEN INDIA BECAME NUCLEAR  
  
Three , & «yt  
  
(Gres Former President  
pe Abdul Kalam and  
on May 11 :  
  
R. Chidambaram were  
\&two on : :  
  
the chief coordinators of  
  
May 13  
. Pokhran-ll  
  
Power of the three bombs as = ea ere ee  
  
15kt Ad5kt 0) kt India became the  
Atom Hydrogen The sub-kiloton 6th country to join  
bomb bomb device the nuclear club  
  
Pokhran Tests (Pokhran — II)  
Series of Nuclear Tests Conducted by India in May 1998 at Rajasthan's Thar Desert (Pokhran Test Range).  
o Marked India's I" Confirmed Nuclear Detonations since 1974's “Peaceful Nuclear Explosion.  
Pokhran — 1: India's 1" Nuclear Test, “Smiling Buddha,” Conducted on 18 May 1974 at Pokhran Range.  
Pokhran — II (May 11, 1998): India conducted 3 Nuclear Tests under codename Shakti — i  
o May 13, 1998: India conducts 2 More Nuclear Tests, Shakti — II and Shakti — II, “online Pokhran — ne  
Series. i  
  
India's Technological Achievements  
  
¢ Global Innovation Index 2026: Ranked 38" globally.  
  
ae h .. . India's Agricultural Milestones  
e = Intellectual Property Filings: 6" Position worldwide (WIPO report).  
  
:@ Green Revolution: Boosted  
Production with High — Yielding  
Wheat and Rice Varieties.  
  
¢ White Revolution: Made India the  
World's Largest Milk Producer.  
  
e Startup Ecosystem: India ranks as 3" Largest Startup ecosystem globally.  
e INS Kalvari (1967): India's 1“ Indigenous Submarine.  
  
e BrahMos: Fastest Supersonic Cruise Missile, co — developed with Russia.  
e Tejas (LCA): Indigenous Supersonic Fighter Jet.  
  
e INS Arihant: 1" Ballistic Missile Nuclear Submarine.  
  
e INS Vikrant (2022): 1“ Indigenous Aircraft Carrier.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 51  
  
\=== PAGE 54 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days  
  
e Chandrayaan — 1 (2008): India's 1“ Lunar Mission; discovered Water on  
  
the Moon. Digital Infrastructure Leadership  
  
\= Aadhaar: World's Largest  
i Biometric ID system.  
  
ee UPI (Unified Payments  
Interface): Revolutionized Digital  
  
e = Mars Orbiter Mission (Mangalyaan, 2013): 1" successful Mars Mission on  
1° Attempt.  
  
e 104 Satellites in One Launch (2017): World Record for Most Satellites  
launched at Once.  
  
e = Chandrayaan — 3 (2023): Soft Landing near the Moon's South Pole —  
global first.  
  
e Aditya — L1 (2023): India's 1" Solar Mission.  
e Upcoming Missions: Gaganyaan (2027) - 1“ Crewed Spaceflight & Shukrayaan (2028) — Venus Orbiter Mission.  
  
\[Government Initiatives to Boost Technology Advancements  
  
e = Make in India (2014): Focuses on boosting Domestic Manufacturing.  
  
e Atal Innovation Mission (AIM): Launched by NITI Aayog to foster Innovation Culture.  
o Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs): Innovation Labs in Schools.  
o Atal Incubation Centres (AICs): Support for Startups.  
  
e National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber — Physical Systems (NM — ICPS): Promotes R\&D in AI, Robotics, IoT,  
Quantum Computing, etc.  
  
e Technology Development Board: Provides Financial Assistance to commercialize Indigenous Technologies.  
  
e National Supercomputing Mission: Plans to install a Network of World — class Supercomputers across Premier Indian  
  
Institutions.  
  
e National Quantum Mission: Focus on Quantum Computing, Communication, Sensing and Materials.  
e IN-SPACe and NSIL (NewSpace India Ltd): Encourage Private Sector Participation in India's Space Programme.  
  
e Defence Acquisition Procedure & iDEX (Innovations for Defence Excellence): Promote Indigenous Defence Startups  
and MSMEs for Advanced Tech Development.  
  
e INSPIRE Program (DST): Encourages Science Education and Research Careers via Scholarships and Internships.  
  
Skill — Up: NPT, CTBT, Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar Awards  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine. fajetqhe  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 52  
  
\=== PAGE 55 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
National Technology Day 2026 was observed on which date and with what theme?  
(a) May 1 — 'Technology for All'  
  
(b) May 11 —'Responsible Innovation for Inclusive Growth'  
  
(c) May 11 —'Digital India: A New Tomorrow'  
  
(d) May 15 —'Science for Sustainable Development’  
  
National Technology Day was first observed to commemorate achievements of which year?  
(a) 1974 (b) 1991 (c) 1998 (d) 2000  
  
Who declared May 11 as National Technology Day?  
(a) PM Manmohan Singh (b) PM Narendra Modi  
(c) PM Atal Bihari Vajpayee (d) President K R Narayanan  
  
Which of the following three events are commemorated on National Technology Day (May 11, 1998)?  
(a) Pokhran-II Tests, Chandrayaan-1 launch, Tejas first flight  
  
(b) Pokhran-II Tests, Hansa-3 first test flight, Trishul missile test  
  
(c) Pokhran-I Tests, BrahMos test, INS Arihant launch  
  
(d) Mangalyaan launch, DRDO missile test, Aadhaar rollout  
  
What was the codename for the Pokhran-II nuclear tests conducted on May 11, 1998?  
(a) Operation Trident (b) Operation Blue Star  
(c) Operation Smiling Buddha (d) Operation Shakti  
  
India's first nuclear test 'Smiling Buddha' (Pokhran-I) was conducted on which date?  
(a) May 11, 1974 (b) May 18, 1974 (c) May 11, 1998 (d) May 13, 1998  
  
Chandrayaan-3 achieved which historic global first in 2023?  
(a) First mission to orbit the Moon (b) First soft landing near the Moon's South Pole  
(c) First crewed mission to the Moon (d) First mission to discover water on the Moon  
  
Which Indian mission discovered water on the Moon?  
(a) Chandrayaan-2 (b) Chandrayaan-3 (c) Chandrayaan-1 (d) Mangalyaan  
  
Mars Orbiter Mission (Mangalyaan) was notable for which achievement?  
  
(a) It was the cheapest Mars mission ever launched  
  
(b) It was India's first successful Mars mission accomplished on the first attempt  
(c) It was the first mission to land on Mars  
  
(d) It discovered signs of life on Mars  
  
What is India's rank in the Global Innovation Index 2026?  
(a) 22™ (b) 30" (c) 38" (d) 45"  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 53  
  
\=== PAGE 56 ===  
Why in News?  
  
On May 1, International Labour Day was observed to honour contribution of workers across the world.  
  
International Labour Day  
  
e Also known as Workers Day or May Day.  
  
"May 2026  
  
Los TOPIC  
. “inNEWS  
  
INTERNATIONAL  
LABOUR DAY  
  
e — Takes place annually on May 1".  
  
¢ Origin can be traced back to Late 19" Century Labour Movement in  
United States.  
  
e In 1886, alarge demonstration happened in America where Labours  
demanded 8 hours of Work ona Daily Basis.  
o However, soon demonstration went out of hand, and in  
  
Chicago, a lot of people got hurt. This incident came to be  
  
knownas "Haymarket Affair".  
o Haymarket Affair Incident marked start of International  
Labour Day.  
  
¢ In 1889, Socialist Parties in Europe came together and decided to celebrate May | CONDITIONS OF WORK  
  
1 as International Labour Day.  
  
e In India, 1“ May Day was celebrated in Chennai (then Madras) in 1923 by (Regulation & Abolition)  
  
Labour Kisan Party of Hindustan.  
e Theme 2026-Ensuring Safety and Health at Work in A Changing Climate  
  
Constitutional Provisions Related to Labour  
  
e = Article 19 (1) C: Grants Citizens Right to form Associations or Unions.  
e = Article 23: Prohibits Forced Labour.  
e Article 24: Prohibits Employment of Children below age of 14 Years.  
  
International Labour Organisation  
Specialized Agency of United Nations.  
  
Dedicated to improving Labour Conditions  
and Living Standards throughout the world.  
  
1" affiliated Specialized Agency of UN in 1946.  
Awarded Nobel Prize for Peace in 1969.  
Director General: Gilbert Houngbo  
  
HQ: Geneva (Switzerland)  
  
CHART 1: TYPES OF  
LABOUR LAWS  
  
« Factories Act, 1948  
¢ The Contract Labour  
  
Act, 1970  
¢ Shops and Commercial  
Establishments Act  
  
« Shops and Commercial  
Establishments Act  
  
WAGES & REMUNERATION  
« The Minimum Wages Act, 1948  
Payment of Wages Act, 1936  
  
SOCIAL SECURITY  
  
« Employees' Provident Fund Act, 1952  
  
Name of the Code Number of amalgamated laws  
« Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923  
Wage Code 4 \* Empl S I Act, 1948  
Industrial Relation Code 3 a ae ted  
Occupational Safety. Health 13 INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  
& Working Conditions Code ¢ The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  
Social Security Code 9 ¢ Industrial Establishments  
  
Total 29 (Standing Orders) Act, 1946  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 54  
  
\=== PAGE 57 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days  
  
Workers through Legislation or Economic Organisation.  
  
Gi fd  
  
Sey ORGANISATION  
  
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR  
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Article 39(a): Provides that State shall secure to its citizens Equal Right to an Adequate Means of Livelihood.  
Article 41: Provides that within limits of its economic capacity State shall secure for Right to Work and Education.  
  
Article 43: Orders State to secure a Living Wage, Decent Conditions of Work, Social and Cultural Opportunities to All  
  
Article 43A: Provides for Participation of Workers in Management of Industries through legislation.  
  
A specialised agency of the United  
Nations devoted to promoting social justice  
  
and internationally recognised human and labour rights  
  
Overview  
  
Establishment Headquarters  
  
Unique Feature Nobel Peace Prize SS  
  
ane Treaty of Versailles Geneva, Switzerland Tripartite 1969 Si y  
  
1946 ILO became the first Members See structure For Improving peace among classes,  
  
specialised agency associated 187 (equal voice pursuing decent work and justice for  
  
with the United Nations, after (India is a for workers, workers  
  
the demise of the League of founding 5 employers, For Providing technical assistance  
  
Nations member) governments) to other developing nations.  
Objectives Fundamental Conventions of ILO  
  
\* Promote and realize standard ¢ An integral part of the United Nations Human Rights Framework  
  
and fundamental labour rights. a  
  
Create greater opportunities  
for women and men.  
  
\-  
  
Enhance social protection.  
  
Strengthen social dialogue and tripartism.  
  
International Labour Standards  
  
Legal instruments drawn up by the ILO's cons-  
tituents (governments, employers and workers)  
& setting out basic principles and rights at work  
  
Conventions & Protocols  
Legally binding  
international treaties  
  
Recommendations  
Non-binding guidelines:  
  
ILO Declaration on Fundamental  
Principles and Rights at Work  
  
Adopted in 1998, amended in 2022  
  
Focus areas  
\* Freedom of association  
Elimination of forced labour  
Abolition of child labour  
Elimination of employment  
discrimination  
Safe & healthy working conditions  
  
.  
  
\* Conventions 1-6 are ratified by India  
  
Forced Labour Convention (No. 29)  
Abolition of Forced Labour (No. 105)  
Equal Remuneration (No. 100)  
Discrimination (No. 111)  
  
Minimum Age (No. 138)  
  
Right to Organise & Collective  
Bargaining (No. 98)  
  
Freedom of Association (No. 87)  
  
Worst Forms of Child Labour (No. 182)  
  
Key Reports  
  
World Employment and  
Social Outlook (WESO)  
  
Global Wage Report  
  
World Social  
Protection Report  
  
World Employment and  
Social Outlook for Youth  
  
World of Work Report  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@  
  
55  
  
\=== PAGE 58 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days  
  
10\.  
  
11\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
International Labour Day is observed on which date every year?  
(a) March 8 (b) April 22 (c) May 1 (d) June 5  
  
The origin of International Labour Day can be traced back to labour movement in which country?  
(a) France (b) United Kingdom (c) United States (d) Russia  
  
In 1886, the large demonstration in America was centred around which key demand of labourers?  
(a) Minimum wage guarantee (b) Right to form trade unions  
(c) 8 hours of work on a daily basis (d) Ban on child labour in factories  
  
The incident that marked the start of International Labour Day, arising from the 1886 demonstration in Chicago, is  
known as:  
(a) The Chicago Riots (b) The Pullman Strike — (c) The Haymarket Affair (d) The Great Labour Uprising  
  
Where and by which organisation was the first May Day celebrated in India in 1923?  
(a) Mumbai (then Bombay) by the All India Trade Union Congress  
  
(b) Chennai (then Madras) by the Labour Kisan Party of Hindustan  
  
(c) Kolkata (then Calcutta) by the Indian National Congress  
  
(d) Delhi by the Communist Party of India  
  
What was the theme of International Labour Day 2024?  
  
(a) 'Decent Work and Economic Growth for All'  
  
(b) 'Ensuring Safety and Health at Work in A Changing Climate’  
(c) ‘Responsible Innovation for Inclusive Growth'  
  
(d) 'Social Justice for All Workers’  
  
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) is a specialized agency of which body?  
(a) World Trade Organisation (b) G20 (c) United Nations (d) World Bank  
  
Who is the current Director General of the International Labour Organisation?  
(a) Guy Ryder (b) Gilbert Houngbo (c) Juan Somavia (d) David Malpass  
  
Where is the Headquarters of the International Labour Organisation located?  
(a) New York, USA (b) Brussels, Belgium (c) Vienna, Austria (d) Geneva, Switzerland  
  
Which Article of the Indian Constitution grants citizens the Right to form Associations or Unions?  
(a) Article 14 (b) Article 19(1)(c) (c) Article 21 (d) Article 32  
  
Article 23 of the Indian Constitution deals with which labour-related provision?  
(a) Prohibition of employment of children below 14 years  
  
(b) Right to work and education  
  
(c) Prohibition of forced labour  
  
(d) Participation of workers in management of industries  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 56  
  
\=== PAGE 59 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days — Tutorial —  
  
12\.  
  
14\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Under Article 24 of the Indian Constitution, employment of children below what age is prohibited?  
(a) 12 Years (b) 14 Years (c) 16 Years (d) 18 Years  
  
Article 39(a) of the Indian Constitution provides for which right for citizens?  
(a) Right to form trade unions (b) Right to equal pay for equal work  
(c) Equal right to an adequate means of livelihood (d) Right to participate in management of industries  
  
Article 41 of the Indian Constitution directs the State to secure which rights within the limits of its economic capacity?  
(a) Right to form unions and Right to strike  
  
(b) Right to Work and Education  
  
(c) Right to a Living Wage and Decent Conditions of Work  
  
(d) Right to Maternity Benefits and Equal Pay  
  
Which Article of the Indian Constitution orders the State to secure a Living Wage, decent conditions of work and  
social and cultural opportunities to all workers?  
(a) Article 39(a) (b) Article 41 (c) Article 43 (d) Article 43A  
  
Ly  
\\- QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE  
Days and Events  
e Indian Institute of Mass Communication released a commemorative issue of Sanchar Madhyam to mark  
  
200 Years of Hindi Journalism.  
o Udant Martand was 1" Hindi Newspaper, launched in 1826 from Kolkata by Jugal Kishore Shukla.  
  
e 15 Nursing Personnel received National Florence Nightingale Awards on International Nurses Day (12  
May).  
o Instituted in 1973 by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to honour Outstanding Nursing Services.  
\= Florence Nightingale: Regarded as Founder of Modern Nursing, a British Social Reformer &  
Statistician.  
e World Lupus Day was observed on 10 May with theme “Make Lupus Visible”.  
o Lupus is a Chronic Autoimmune Disease in which Immune System attacks healthy Tissues and Organs.  
\= Primarily affects Women of Childbearing Age.  
  
e International Day for Biological Diversity observed on 22 May to promote biodiversity conservation with  
2026 theme, “Acting Locally for Global Impact”.  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 57  
  
\=== PAGE 60 ===  
at p  
—O  
  
"May 2026  
  
», TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
MISCELLANEOUS  
  
INTERNATIONAL NEWS AND RELATIONS  
  
India — Vietnam Relations  
  
India and Vietnam elevated bilateral ties to enhanced Comprehensive Strategic Partnership following state visit of To Lam.  
  
Both Countries set a target of achieving USD 25 Billion bilateral trade by 2030.  
Vietnam formally joined Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative.  
  
e Vietnam is India's 4" Largest Trading Partner in ASEAN.  
  
e — Joint Vision Statement for 2030 seeks deeper Defence Cooperation and Joint Development of Advanced Defence Platforms.  
  
o India has extended a USD 500 Million Defence Line of Credit to Vietnam.  
  
o Military Exercises: VINBAX (Army), Sahyog (Coast Guard)  
  
e JREL (India) Ltd and Institute for Technology of Radioactive and Rare Elements (Vietnam) signed Strategic Rare Earths Pact  
  
to Reduce Geopolitical Dependence on Critical Mineral Supply Chains.  
  
e Archaeological Survey of India is involved in restoration work at My Son Sanctuary (UNESCO World Heritage Site)  
  
associated with ancient Champa civilization.  
  
Dear Lpt’ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic ¢  
of time, effort, energy and money  
be fair if someone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
/ putting in lot  
  
ssful and it woul  
  
And they will create competition for-you without being the part of Law  
prep. To prevent this unfair activity, be vigilant and inform us if you find  
  
anybody ng (in any form) it aching from it.  
  
ge of Law Prep ma  
  
rial is illegal and  
  
sonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
  
suggestions/feedb: mplaints/compliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
58  
  
\=== PAGE 61 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
ASEAN  
  
Association of Southeast Asian Nations  
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
LAW PREP  
  
—Tutorial—  
  
Members (11) Core Aims  
eg Indonesia Msq\_ Brunei (1984) \* Accelerate economic and  
social progress.  
  
Promote regional peace  
and stability.  
  
Foster collaboration  
across fields.  
Cooperate with global  
organizations.  
  
Go Laos (1997)  
| ate | Cambodia (1999)  
  
Timor-Leste (2025)  
  
Singapore  
  
eer  
| Thailand  
\=  
  
Formation Key Agreements and Fourms  
  
8\*August 1967  
  
East Asia  
Summit (EAS)  
Created in 2005,  
a leaders-level  
forum witha  
varied agenda.  
  
ASEAN Free Trade  
Area (AFTA)  
Established in  
1992 to create a  
single market.  
  
ASEAN Regional  
Forum (ARF)  
Established in  
  
1994 for political  
and security  
  
dialogue  
  
\* Bangkok, Thailand  
  
Principles  
  
1\. Non-interference in  
internal affairs of  
member states.  
  
2\. Consensual  
decision- making.  
  
3\. Maintaining  
"centrality" in  
regional matters.  
  
ASEAN Economic  
Community (AEC)  
Formed in 2015 to facilitate  
the free flow of goods,  
services, investments,  
capital, and labor.  
  
Regional Comprehensive  
Economic Partnership  
(RCEP):  
Concluded in 2019,  
covering 30% of the  
world's population.  
  
Key Challenges  
  
\* Geopolitical Pressures: Balancing influence between China and the U.S.  
  
\* South China Sea Disputes: Inability to provide a coordinated response to  
China's territorial claims.  
  
\+ Myanmar Crisis: Criticism for not isolating the military junta in Myanmar.  
  
\+ Economic Ties: China as the largest trading partner, while the U.S. provides  
strategic support.  
  
Indian-ASEAN Relations Thailand  
1 rr Current Historical Strategic |  
importance =— Cooperation Context Goals Laos  
  
ASEAN is central Emphasis on India-ASEAN summits Promote a free,  
  
to India's Act political, economic, began in 2002; the open, inclusive,  
East Policyand and security Act East Policy was peaceful, and  
Indo-Pacific cooperation. announced in 2014. prosperous Indo  
vision. -Pacific region. \_\_ |  
  
Myanmar  
Cambodia  
  
Recent Developments and Statements  
  
\+ India's Commitment: PM of India at the 20th  
ASEAN-India Summit emphasized ASEAN's  
centrality to India's Act East Policy and Indo-Pacific  
vision.  
  
\* Strategic Engagement: Continuous expansion of  
political, economic, and security cooperation with  
ASEAN.  
  
Malaysia\!  
Singapore —  
  
HEADQUARTERS  
  
Jakarta, Indonesia  
  
Institutional Mechanism  
  
Qe Charter  
  
Effective Date: 15 December  
2008\.  
  
Ratification: Fully ratified by all  
10 Member States.  
  
Legal Status: Legally binding  
agreement, registered with the  
UN Secretariat.  
  
New Framework: Establishes  
new organs to enhance  
community-building.  
  
Q vers sum  
  
It meets annually to discuss  
regional issues and set policy  
directions.  
  
® ASEAN Coordinating Council  
  
It oversees the implementation  
of ASEAN agreements and  
decisions.  
  
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)  
  
It is a platform for dialogue and  
cooperation on political and  
security issues among ASEAN  
member countries and their  
partners.  
  
05 } ASEAN Secretariat  
  
It supports and facilitates  
ASEAN's activities and initiatives.  
  
06\) Decision Making  
  
It is done through consultation  
and consensus.  
  
Fel  
  
Timor-Leste  
  
\~  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
59  
  
\=== PAGE 62 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Thucydides Trap  
Xi Jinping invoked “Thucydides Trap” Concept during talks with Donald Trump to warn against Escalating China— United States  
Strategic Rivalry.  
e Idea originates from writings of Thucydides. :  
o Analysed Peloponnesian War fought between Athens Strategic Significance  
(Emerging Power) and Sparta (Dominant Established Relevance in International Relations: Powe  
  
Transitions in International System, Rivalries  
among Major Powers, Security Dilemmas an  
Arms Competition.  
  
Power).  
  
o Core Argument: Thucydides argued that growth of Athenian  
  
Power and fear it generated in Sparta made conflict © Concerns in Modern Context: Trade Tensions  
  
increasingly inevitable. Military Competition, Technological Rivalry  
  
e Refers to Heightened Risk of Conflict that emerges when a Rising and Maritime Disputes between Major Globa  
Powers.  
  
Power challenges an Established Dominant Power.  
  
e Resulting Fear, Mistrust and Strategic Competition may increase  
likelihood of Confrontation or War.  
  
¢ Concept is often used in context of China as Rising Power and United States as Existing Global Power.  
  
Criticism of Concept  
Determinism Debate: Some scholars argue that theory may Oversimplify International Politics by implying  
that Conflict becomes Unavoidable during Power Transitions.  
Importance of Diplomacy: Critics highlight that Economic Interdependence, International Institutions and  
Diplomatic Engagement can help prevent escalation between Rival Powers.  
  
Ebola Outbreak in DR Congo  
  
WHO declared Ebola outbreak in Democratic Republic of Congoa Public |  
Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), linked to PHEIC  
Bundibugyo Strain in Ituri region. :  
  
\= Under International Health |  
Regulations 2005, PHEIC is defined as :  
a Public Health Risk of International  
Disease Spread requiring Coordinated  
  
e — Type: Zoonotic Disease  
e Formerly known as Ebola Haemorrhagic Fever.  
  
Globa Response.  
2" Highest Global Health Alert after  
  
e Severe and Fatal Viral Disease affecting Humans and Primates.  
  
e 1" identified in 1976 during Two Simultaneous Outbreaks; one in  
Yambuku (DRC) near Ebola River and other in Nzara (South Sudan).  
  
e Caused By: Orthoebolavirus Genus under Filoviridae Family.  
  
e Six Species: Bombali, Bundibugyo, Zaire (Deadliest), Reston, Sudan, Tai Forest.  
  
POLITY AND GOVERNANCE  
  
Mission for Cotton Productivity’  
Union Cabinet approved Mission for Cotton Productivity (2026 —27 to 2030-31), announced in Union Budget 2025 — 26.  
  
e Popularly called Kapas Kanti.  
  
e — Aligns with India's 5F Vision (Farm — Fibre — Factory \> Fashion \> Foreign)  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 60  
  
\=== PAGE 63 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous \[— Tutorial\]  
  
¢ Objective: Make India Self — Sufficient in Cotton, Enhance Global i Cotton and its Cultivation in India  
Competitiveness of India's Textile Sector, Improve Productivity, be Popularly called “White Gold”  
Quality and Sustainability by 2030-31. © World's 2" Largest Pro ducer an ds  
  
e Implementing Ministries: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Consumer of Cotton after China, with  
Welfare & Ministry of Textiles Largest Cultivation Area globally.  
  
e Largest Cotton — producing States:  
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Telangana, |  
Karnataka. :  
  
o Supported by Indian Council of Agricultural Research and  
  
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.  
  
e Coverage: Focus on 140 Districts across 14 major Cotton — growing  
  
States.  
5F Vision of the Textile Sector  
  
& Ep Pas Ey Ge  
  
The initial stage The transformation Manufacturing and Designing and Exporting and global  
involves agriculture of raw materials into production in creating fashionable distribution of  
and raw material fibers. factories. E.g. items. textiles.  
production. weaving  
  
Bt Cotton  
  
ie Genetically Modified (GM) Cotton.  
e Developed by incorporating a Gene from bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) making it resistant against pests  
  
like Bollworm.  
e¢ Only GM Crop approved by Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC) of Ministry of Environment,  
Forest and Climate Change for Commercial Cultivation.  
CSIR — National Botanical Research Institute has developed World's I" Pink Bollworm— Resistant GM Cotton  
  
India is the only country which Major 9 cotton growing states  
grows all four species of cotton divided according to Agro-Ecological  
zones  
  
G. Arboreum and G. Barbadense  
  
G. Herbaceum (Egyptian cotton)  
(Asian cotton)  
. = Northern Zone  
G.Hirsutum = Central Zone  
(American Upland cotton) = Southern Zone  
  
a |  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 61  
  
y  
  
\=== PAGE 64 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Change in Citizenship Rules 2026  
  
Centre notified draft Citizenship Rules Amendments imposing stricter declaration and surrender norms for applicants from  
  
Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh.  
  
e Schedule 1C Amendment: Changes inserted in Schedule IC of  
  
iti i Constitutional Fact:  
Citizenship Rules. onstitutional Facts  
  
Covered under Part II (Articles 5—11).  
  
Citizenship = Union List Subject  
(Parliament Exclusive Power).  
  
India does NOT allow Dual Citizenship.  
o Acquisition of Foreign Citizenship  
  
o Applies specifically to applicants from Pakistan, Afghanistan,  
  
Bangladesh.  
  
o Covers Non — Muslim Communities: Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists,  
  
Jains, Parsis, Christians.  
  
leads to Loss of Indian Citizenship  
  
e Mandatory Declaration Requirement: Applicants must declare whether  
(Automatic Termination)  
  
they possess a Valid or Expired Passport from Pakistan, Afghanistan and  
Bangladesh.  
o They mustalso provide full passport details for verification.  
  
e — Passport Surrender Rule: If Citizenship is granted Foreign Passport must be surrendered within 15 days submission to Senior  
Superintendent of Post.  
  
e Introduced electronic— Overseas Citizen of India (e— OCI) Cards alongside Physical OCI Cards.  
  
o Government will maintain a Centralised Electronic Database of OCI Holders.  
  
e¢ = Minor Children holding an Indian Passport cannot simultaneously possess passports of Another Country.  
  
Citizenship Act, 1955  
©@ =\~ Modes of Acquisition: Birth, Descent, Registration, Naturalisation, Incorporation of Territory  
  
.@ = Termination/Loss of Citizenship  
  
: o Renunciation: Voluntary Surrender of Indian Citizenship  
  
0 Termination: Automatic Loss if foreign citizenship is acquired. :  
o Deprivation: Government Action can be imposed if Citizenship obtained Fraudulently | Disloyalty to  
  
Constitution | Wartime Unlawful Communication / Trade | Jail Term (22 Years within 5 Years of  
Naturalisation) | Long Residence Abroad (=7 years) :  
  
Privilege Notice  
  
Privilege Notice moved in Rajya Sabha against Union Education Minister over alleged Breach of Parliamentary Dignity.  
e Formal Mechanism used by MPs to allege Breach of Parliamentary Privilege or Contempt of the House by Ministers,  
Members of Parliament and External Individuals or Institutions  
e Aim: To protect Dignity, Authority and Independence of Parliament.  
e Derived from Article 105 of the Constitution.  
o Provides MPs Freedom of Speech in Parliament, Immunity from Legal Proceedings for Legislative Actions and  
Protection of Institutional Dignity.  
e Procedure of Privilege Motion: MP submits notice under Lok Sabha Rule 222 and Rajya Sabha Rule 187.  
o Speaker/Chairman's Role: Reviews Notice and decides whether to allow discussion in House or refer it to Privileges  
Committee.  
o Final decision taken by Lok Sabha/ Rajya Sabha.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 62  
  
\=== PAGE 65 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Privileges Committee Composition  
o Lok Sabha: 15 Members (Nominated by Speaker)  
\= Chairperson appointed by Speaker  
o Rajya Sabha: 10 Members (Nominated by Chairman)  
\= Chaired by Deputy Chairman  
  
Prime Minister's Employment Generation Programme  
  
Prime Minister's Employment Generation Programme achieved 100% Budget Utilisation.  
e Launched in 2008.  
o Merged Prime Minister's Rojgar Yojana and Rural Employment Generation Programme.  
e Nature: Central Sector Credit— linked Subsidy Scheme  
e Aim: Promoting Self— Employment through establishment of Micro— Enterprises.  
e¢ Covers Both Rural Areas and Urban Areas  
  
e — Eligibility Criteria: Any Individual aged 18 Years or Above can apply.  
  
o =©Minimum Qualification of Class 8 pass required for Manufacturing Projects above =10 Lakh and Service projects above  
%5 Lakh.  
  
e Administered By: Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
  
e Implemented By: Khadi and Village Industries Commission  
  
Fair and Remunerative Price  
  
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs increased Fair and Remunerative Price of Sugarcane by 10 per quintal for 2026 — 27  
Sugar Season.  
  
e Minimum Legally Guaranteed Price that Sugar Mills must pay Sugarcane Farmers for their produce across India.  
  
e Ensures Assured Returns to Sugarcane Farmers, Protection against Price Exploitation by Mills and Stability in Sugarcane  
Cultivation.  
  
e Fixed under Sugarcane (Control) Order 1966 and Issued under Essential Commodities Act 1955.  
e Recommended By: Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices  
  
e Final Approval: Cabinet Committee on Economic A ffairs  
  
Feature FRP MSP  
Applicable Crop Sugarcane Only 22 Major Crops  
Legal Status Legally Binding on Mills Not Legally Enforceable on Private Buyers  
Fixing Authority CCEA (on CACP advice) Cabinet (on CACP advice)  
Model Code of Conduct  
  
A Petition in Supreme Court of India alleged that PM Modi's National Broadcast during elections violated Model Code of  
Conduct and Representation of People Act 1951.  
  
e Legal Status: Non- Statutory  
e Set of Guidelines issued by Election Commission of India to regulate Political Parties, Candidates and Government in Power.  
  
e Purpose: Ensure Free, Fair and Level—playing Field Elections.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 63  
  
\=== PAGE 66 ===  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Core Idea: No Unfair Advantage to Ruling Party.  
  
Key Judgment  
Mohinder Singh Gill vs Chief Election  
Commissioner (1978) — Article 324 =  
“Reservoir of Power” for ECI.  
  
e Key Provisions: No Combining Official Visits + Election  
Campaigning.  
  
o NoUse ofGovernment Machinery for Campaign.  
  
o =NoMisuse of Publicly Funded Media. Harbans Singh Jalal vs Union of India  
‘One Case One Data' and 'Su Sahay' (1997) — MCC starts from Date of  
Supreme Court of India launched 2 Digital Unitiatives — 'One Case One Election Schedule announcement.  
  
Data’ and'Su Sahay’.  
e¢ One Case One Data: Digital Integration Initiative aimed at creating a Unified Judicial Data Ecosystem across India.  
© Objective: To integrate Case — related Data from Supreme Court, High Courts, District Courts and Taluka Courts into a  
Single Interconnected Digital Platform.  
e SuSahay: AI- enabled Chatbot integrated with Supreme Court website.  
o Purpose: To assist Litigants and Citizens in accessing Court—related Services and Procedural Information more easily.  
  
o Developed By: National Informatics Centre in collaboration with Supreme Court Registry.  
  
ECONOMICS  
  
RBI's Economic Capital Framework  
  
RBI Board approved record 2.86 Lakh Crore Surplus Transfer (Highest Ever) to Central  
  
Government for FY 2025-26. Surplus  
\_ Net Income derived from |  
  
RBI Surplus calculated under Revised Framework, maintaining Contingent Risk Buffer at  
  
4.5% —7.5% of Balance Sheet. Total Income minus Total  
  
Expenditure.  
  
e Introduced in 2019 following Bimal Jalan Committee Recommendations.  
e Economic Capital Framework governs:  
o HowRBI provisions for Financial Risks?  
  
o Howittransfers Surplus/Dividends to Government of India?  
  
Key Features of ECF  
Contingency Risk Buffer A Financial Safety Buffer to guard against Unforeseen Risks.  
Surplus Transfer Mechanism Surplus is Transferred to Gol only after CRB Targets are Met.  
Review Cycle To Be Reviewed Every 5 Years (2025 Review is 1 Such Exercise).  
  
Surplus Transfer and ECF  
  
e Every year, RBI pays a Dividend to Government to help with :  
Government's Finances from its Surplus Profit. ; How RBI earn its Profit?  
  
o Section 47 of RBI Act 1934 mandates that Any Profits made by © Open Market Operations, wherein a  
  
RBI from its operations be sent to Centre. Central Bank Purchases or Sells Bonds.  
  
: : . e Interest Received from Bonds.  
e Economic Capital Framework provides a Methodology for  
  
e Returns from its Foreign Currency Assets.  
  
determining Appropriate Level of Risk Provisions and Profit  
Distribution to be made under Section 47 of RBI Act 1934.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 64  
  
\=== PAGE 67 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
o RBI constituted a Committee headed by Bimal Jalan to  
review 2015—16 ECF in2018. Significance of Record RBI Surplus Transfer  
  
\= RBlalso has to maintain a CRB within a range of 6.5% to Increased Capital Expenditure  
  
5.5% of RBI's Balance Sheet.  
o RBI Board's Technical Committee, led by YH Malegam in  
  
Reduced Borrowing and Fiscal Consolidation  
  
Boost to Bond Markets  
  
2013, recommended Higher Transfer of Reserves and Meeting Revenue Shortfall  
  
Surplus to Government, which typically Averages around Covering Disinvestment Target  
  
0.5% of Gross Domestic Product.  
  
Contingency Risk Buffer  
  
Fund kept for Unforeseen Contingencies like Depreciation of Securities Values, Risks from Monetary Rate Policy, etc. |  
  
Forms Core of RBI's Enterprise-Wide Risk Management Framework Introduced in 2012.  
RBI Raises Contingent Risk Buffer to 7.5% for Financial Year 2024-25.  
  
India — New Zealand Free Trade Agreement  
  
India and New Zealand signed India— New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, boosting engagement with Developed Economies.  
  
Free Trade Agreement: A Pact between Countries to Reduce or Eliminate Customs Duties and Liberalise Trade in Services  
ensures Investment Protection and Safeguard Intellectual Property Rights.  
  
New Zealand is India's 2" Largest Trading Partner in Oceania.  
e¢ = Market Access: 100% Duty Elimination on Indian Exports to New Zealand.  
  
o India provides access to 70.03% Tariff Lines, retaining 29.97% under Exclusion.  
e Investment Commitments: New Zealand to invest USD 20 Billion over 15 Years.  
  
e Organic and Agricultural Cooperation: Mutual Recognition of Organic Certification Standards.  
  
Elen  
  
o Sensitive Sectors (e.g., dairy, agriculture) kept under Exclusion to protect Domestic Producers.  
  
e MENTreatment: Most— Favoured Nation treatment extended in 139 Sectors.  
  
SAARC Currency Swap Framework  
  
India approved 1° 230 Billion withdrawal by Maldives under SAARC Currency Swap Framework.  
  
Currency Swap Framework  
© Bilateral Arrangement between Central Banks.  
e Exchange of Domestic Currencies at a Predetermined Rate and Reversal at a Future Date at Same Rate.  
¢ Objective: Provides Short — Term Liquidity Support.  
  
e Launched by RBI in 2012.  
  
Significance  
Strengthens Regional Financial Stability.  
  
e Purpose: Support SAARC Nations during BoP Crises.  
  
Reduces Dependence on External Borrowing. :  
Promotes Indian Rupee Internationalisation.  
Reinforces Neighbourhood First Policy.  
  
e Revised Framework (2024-2027): 2250 Billion INR Swap  
Window & Separate $2 Billion USD — Euro Facility.  
  
e Tenure: 3 Months (extendable twice)  
  
Index of Eight Core Industries  
  
Index of Eight Core Industries grew 1.7% in Apr 2026, signalling Moderate Expansion across Key Industrial Sectors.  
  
e Serves as a Leading Indicator of Overall Industrial Activity.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 65  
  
\=== PAGE 68 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous — Tutorial =  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Monthly Production Index that tracks performance of India's Most Critical Infrastructure and Industrial Sectors.  
Eight Core Industries: Coal, Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Refinery Products, Fertilisers, Steel, Cement, Electricity  
Base Year: 2011-12  
  
Aligned with Index of Industrial Production  
  
Released By: Office of Economic Adviser  
  
Importance in Economy  
  
Proxy for Industrial Growth: These industries collectively have a strong influence on Manufacturing, :  
Infrastructure Development and Energy Availability.  
  
Weight in IIP: Core Industries account for 40.27% Weight in Index of Industrial Production.  
  
Early Economic Indicator: Changes in ICI ofien signal shifts in GDP Momentum, Industrial Slowdown or  
Recovery, Infrastructure Demand Cycles  
  
Purchasing Managers' Index  
  
India's Manufacturing PMI rises to 54.7 in April 2026, signalling continued expansion despite Slower Growth Momentum,  
  
though it marked 2" Slowest Pace of improvement in nearly four years.  
  
Lebanon accused Israel of 'Ecocide' over alleged Environmental,  
Destruction during Military Operations. Status of Ecocide in India  
  
Economic Indicator that measures Business Activity and Overall Economic Health in Manufacturing or Services Sector.  
Acts as an Early Indicator of Economic Trends before Official Industrial Data is released.  
  
Helps Investors, Businesses and Policymakers assess Demand Conditions, Production Trends, Inflationary Pressures,  
Employment Outlook, Supply — Chain Efficiency.  
  
Components of PMI: New Orders, Output, Employment, Suppliers’ Delivery Times Stock of Items Purchased  
Interpretation of PMI  
  
o PMI\>50— Expansion/Growth in Economic Activity  
  
o =PMI=50—NoChange  
  
o PMI\<50—Contraction/Decline in Activity  
  
Compiled By: S\&P Global  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
Ecocide  
  
India has not signed Rome Statute, hence :  
not bound by ICC Jurisdiction.  
  
In MK Ranjitsinh (2024): SC recognised  
Right against Adverse Climate Change  
under Articles 14 & 21.  
  
Refers to Unlawful or Reckless Acts committed with knowledge that  
they are likely to cause Severe, Widespread or Long — term  
  
Environmental Damage.  
  
Currently Not Recognised under Rome Statute of International  
Criminal Court.  
  
o Recognised International Crimes: Genocide, Crimes Against Humanity, War Crimes, Crime of Aggression.  
National Recognition: Codified in \~15 Countries, including Vietnam (1" to codify), France, Belgium, Russia, Ukraine.  
  
Illustrative Examples of Ecocide: Use of Agent Orange during Vietnam War, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, Large - scale  
Amazon Deforestation  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 66  
  
\=== PAGE 69 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
REPORTS, SUMMITS AND INDICES  
  
Panchayat Advancement Index 2.0  
  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj released Panchayat Advancement Index 2.0 for FY 2023 — 24.  
  
Anationwide Performance Assessment Framework for Gram Panchayats and Traditional Local Bodies.  
  
Recognised as 1“ Comprehensive Index globally to evaluate Rural Local Governance using Objective and Verifiable  
  
Indicators.  
Tiered Performance Grading  
  
\_ Basedona Composite Score (0— 100)  
e Achiever (A+): =90  
  
e Front Runner (A): 75-89  
e Performer (B): 60—74  
  
e Aspirant (C): 40-59  
Beginner (D): \< 40  
  
Aligns with United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.  
Translates 17 SDGs into 9 Localised Sustainable Development Goals.  
  
Thematic Excellence: Poverty — Free and Enhanced Livelihoods &  
Healthy Panchayats  
  
Top Performers: Tripura (Highest Share of Front Runners) \> Kerala \>  
Odisha  
  
o No Panchayat could make it to 'Achiever' Category.  
ASUSE 2025  
  
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation released key findings of ASUSE 2025 for reference period Jan—Dec 2025.  
  
From this round onward, MoSPI shifted to a Calendar— Year Format (Jan— Dec), replacing earlier Oct— Sep survey cycle.  
  
United Nations Environment Programme's International Methane  
  
ASUSE stands for Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises  
  
Conducted annually since 2021 —22.  
  
Objective: To provide Comprehensive and Timely Data on India's vast Unincorporated Non—Agricultural Sector.  
Covers Both Rural and Urban India.  
  
o Excludes villages in Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
  
Conducted By: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
  
SPACE  
  
Methane Alert and Response System (MARS)  
  
Emissions Observatory is expanding Methane Alert and Response System Extra Shots  
  
(MARS) to include Coal Mines and Waste Facilities. Earlier, system  
focused only on Oil and Gas Sector.  
  
©e = China, United States and India rank |  
among World's Largest Methane  
  
Emitters.  
MARS stands for Methane Alert and Response System  
  
Launched at COP27 (Sharm el— Sheikh) in 2022.  
  
e¢ Methane is a Highly Potent Greenhouse  
Gas with much Greater Short — Term  
  
World's 1“ Satellite — based System designed to detect and help Warming Potential than Carbon Dioxide.  
mitigate Major Methane Leaks (Super— Emitter Events).  
  
Supports Global Methane Pledge, which aims to Reduce Global Methane Emissions by 30% by 2030 compared to 2020  
levels.  
  
o Indiais nota formal member of pledge.  
  
Developed under International Methane Emissions Observatory of UNEP.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 67  
  
\=== PAGE 70 ===  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
SMILE Mission  
  
European Space Agency and Chinese Academy of Sciences launched SMILE Spacecraft aboard Vega — C Rocket from French  
  
Guiana.  
  
SMILE stands for Solar Wind Magnetosphere Ionosphere Link Explorer.  
1"—ever Simultaneous X — Ray + Ultraviolet Imaging of Earth's Magnetosphere  
o Real—Time Observation of how Earth's Magnetic Field deflects Solar Wind.  
Purpose: To study how the Sun interacts with Earth's Magnetic Environment.  
  
Core Objective: Observes interaction between Solar Wind (Charged Particles from the Sun), Earth's Magnetosphere  
(Magnetic Shield) and Ionosphere (Upper Atmospheric Layer).  
  
o Ithelps understand how Earth is protected from harmful solar radiation.  
  
ORGANISATION  
  
2026 SCO Defence Ministers' Meeting  
  
At SCO Defence Ministers' Meeting 2026, India urged Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Members to adopt Collective  
  
Approach against Terrorism, warned Against Double Standards.  
  
Emerged from Shanghai Five (1996): Kazakhstan, China, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan  
Became SCO in 2001 after Uzbekistan joined.  
  
Core Objective: Promote regional cooperation to counter Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism  
Accounts for \~30% of Global GDP and \~40% of World Population.  
Members (10): China, Russia, India (2017), Pakistan, Iran, Belarus  
  
o Central Asian Nations: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan  
Observers: Afghanistan, Mongolia  
  
Council of Heads of States: Supreme Decision-making Body.  
  
Regional Anti—Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent.  
  
Official Languages: Russian and Chinese  
  
Secretariat: Beijing (China)  
  
Significance of SCO for India  
\-e Regional Security: Provides a platform to address Terrorism, Extremism through RATS, enables Intelligence Sharing and ;  
  
Counter — Terrorism Coordination.  
  
e Strategic Balancing: Offers space to engage with China and Pakistan helps prevent Anti — India Narratives within  
Regional Forums.  
  
e = Energy Security: Facilitates access to Central Asia's Rich Oil, Gas, Uranium Reserves.  
  
e Economic Engagement: Enhances Trade and Investment opportunities with Eurasian Countries.  
  
Central Asia Outreach: Strengthens India's Engagement with a region where geographical constraints limit direct acc  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 68  
  
\=== PAGE 71 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Challenges for India within SCO  
e = China-— Pakistan Axis: Their strategic alignment can limit India's Influence and shape narratives against Indian  
Interests. :  
  
\-e Geopolitical Tensions: Border Disputes and Political Frictions affect Constructive Engagement.  
e — Security-Centric Focus: SCO's emphasis on Security overshadows Economic and Developmental Cooperation.  
sed Dec d limits decisi  
  
Indian Ocean Rim Association  
  
Ministry of External Affairs, in collaboration with Indian Council of World Affairs (1943 | Foreign Policy Think Tank | New  
Delhi) and Indian Ocean Rim Association, organised 10" Indian Ocean Dialogue in New Delhi, with theme “Indian Ocean Region  
  
ina Transforming World”.  
India has also assumed Chair of IORA for 2025 — 2027.  
  
e IORAstands for Indian Ocean Rim Association.  
e Established in 1997 with its vision originating during a visit by Nelson Mandela to India in 1995.  
e — Inter—Governmental Organisation aimed at promoting Regional Cooperation among Countries bordering Indian Ocean.  
  
e Areas of Cooperation: Maritime Safety and Security, Trade and Investment Facilitation, Fisheries Management, Disaster  
Risk Management, Academic and Scientific Cooperation  
  
e Members: 23 States and 12 Dialogue Partners  
  
e Secretariat: Ebene (Mauritius)  
  
Indian Ocean Dialogue  
Launched in 2013 during 13" Council of Ministers Meeting in Perth (Australia).  
Premier Track 1.5 Diplomatic Forum under IORA.  
Serves as a platform bringing together Policymakers, Strategic Experts, Academicians, Maritime Stakeholders. i  
Objectives: Maritime Security Cooperation, Regional Connectivity, Blue Economy Discussions, Strategic and  
Geopolitical Issues in Indian Ocean Region, strengthening collaboration among Littoral States. :  
India has hosted 3 Editions of Dialogue: 2014, 2019, 2021  
  
Public Accounts Committee  
  
Reconstituted Public Accounts Committee convenes under chairmanship of KC Venugopal to review Government Expenditure  
and Accountability.  
  
¢ One of Parliament's Oldest Financial Committees. Functions of PAC  
\_@ Examination of Government |  
  
e 1" constituted in 1921 following Montagu—Chelmsford Reforms.  
Expenditure  
  
e Scrutiny of CAG Reports  
e = Financial Accountability  
  
e Total Members: 22 (15 from Lok Sabha and 7 from Rajya Sabha)  
  
e Elected annually by Parliament according to Principle of Proportional  
  
Representation. Inquiry into Unaudited Irregularities  
  
e Chairperson: Chosen from Opposition Party (By Convention)  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 69  
  
\=== PAGE 72 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Significance ; Key Limitation  
\_e Strengthens Parliamentary Control - PAC can examine Expenditure  
over Public Finance.  
  
Only after it has been incurred.  
  
e Promotes Transparency and .  
P y e Its recommendations are  
  
Accountability in Governance.  
  
e Acts as a Watchdog over Executive Advisory, Not Binding on  
  
Government.  
  
Spending.  
  
RICAL EVENTS  
75th Anniversary of Korean War  
  
India and Republic of Korea jointly inaugurated Indian War Memorial in South Korea to commemorate 75" Anniversary of  
Korean War (1950—53) and honour contribution of Indian Troops.  
  
Background of Korean War  
¢ Root of Conflict lies in Japanese Occupation of Korea between 1910—  
1945\.  
  
e When Japan was defeated in 2" World War, Allied Forces agreed to  
establish a “4 — Power Trusteeship over Korea” at Yalta Conference  
(1945).  
  
e However, USSR invaded Korea and took control of North while South |5  
remained under Rest of Allies, mainly USA.  
o North Korea under Soviet influence led by Kim II Sung.  
o South Korea under American influence led by Syngman Rhee.  
  
e In 1948, Republic of Korea (South Korea) and Democratic People's §  
Republic of Korea (North Korea) was established.  
  
th  
  
e Division of Two Regions was along 38" Parallel North, which still continues to be Official Border dividing Two Koreas.  
  
Course of War  
e North Korean Invasion: On 25 June 1950, North NORTH  
Korean troops crossed 38" Parallel and invaded South il  
Ki KOREA pe  
orea. Line  
  
o United Nations Security Council condemned  
  
Demilitarized Zone (DMZ);  
  
Invasion and authorised Military Intervention.  
  
2nd Tunnel 4th Tunnel  
  
e UN Counteroffensive: UN — led Forces carried out  
  
Bath Parallel  
  
famous Inchon Landing.  
  
o In 1951, during Korean War, forces led by So 3rd Tunnel  
  
Douglas MacArthur crossed 38" Parallel, which  
escalated conflict and contributed to entry of SOUTH  
  
China in support of North Korea. cou KOREA  
  
SS p\>  
e Armistice Agreement: Korean Armistice Agreement °  
was signed on 27 July 1953 between United Nations & © ORs  
Command, Korean People's Army, and Chinese People's Volunteer Army.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 70  
  
\=== PAGE 73 ===  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
o Led to Official Ceasefire Without a Peace Treaty. Hence, North and South Korea are technically still at war.  
  
o Establishment of Demilitarized Zone: Buffer Zone between North and South Korea around 38" Parallel.  
India's Role in Korean War  
  
© e = Diplomatic Mediation: India advocated peaceful settlement through United Nations and attempted to reduce  
: Cold War tensions.  
  
e Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission: India chaired NNRC responsible for supervising prisoner-of-war  
: repatriation after armistice.  
  
Custodian Force India: India deployed Custodian Force India to manage prisoners unwilling to return  
  
Komagata Maru Incident (1914)  
  
A Contemporary Work by a Punjabi Artist Diljit Dosanjh revisited Komagata Maru Incident, contrasting Past Racial Exclusion  
  
with evolving Global Attitudes toward Indians.  
  
Background Factors  
Migration Pressures: Early 20" century Punjab  
witnessed Rural Indebtedness & Famines and |  
Epidemics. Many Peasants and Ex — Soldiers  
migrated abroad for livelihood.  
  
e Colonial Assumptions: Since both India and  
Canada were under British Rule, Indians believed :  
they had Right to Move Freely within Empire. :  
  
e Komagata Maru (also known as Guru Nanak Jahaz) was chartered by Gurdit Singh.  
  
e Carried 376 Indian Passengers to Canada in 1914, primarily Sikhs, along with Muslims and Hindus.  
  
e Objective: Seek better Economic Opportunities and Settlement  
Rights within British Empire. Reasons for Denial  
  
8 Discriminatory Immigration Policy: Canada :  
  
enforced “Continuous Journey Regulation”  
  
(1908) required Immigrants to travel directly  
  
from their country of origin without stops.  
  
e = Onarrival in Vancouver: Only 24 Passengers were permitted to  
disembark.  
  
o Remaining passengers were confined onboard & denied  
  
adequate food, water and medical care. o This condition was practically impossible  
  
e Resistance and Legal Efforts: Passengers resisted forced from India.  
  
removal attempts. e Racial Prejudice: Policy was influenced by Anti  
  
— Asian Sentiment following Vancouver Anti —  
Asian Riots of 1907. Supported by exclusionary  
groups like Asiatic Exclusion League.  
  
o Local Indian Community Groups raised funds to  
  
challenge discriminatory laws legally.  
  
e Ultimately, ship was denied entry and forced to return.  
  
Budge Budge Tragedy  
: e After rejection in Canada and other ports during World War I, ship returned to India (Budge Budge Port, Calcutta).  
: e AtBudge Budge, British Authorities attempted to deport Passengers to Punjab.  
o Passengers resisted and marched toward the city. Troops opened fire.  
  
° Gurdit Singh later surrendered on advice of Mahatma Gandhi and was imprisoned.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 71  
  
\=== PAGE 74 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
50" Anniversary of Sikkim's Integration with India  
  
Prime Minister of India attended Closing Ceremony of 50 Years of Statehood celebrations of Sikkim in Gangtok.  
  
Pre — Integration Phase \#ThisDaylInHistory  
  
16 May 1975:  
  
Sikkim Officially  
Became a Part of  
  
\_e Sikkim was an Independent Himalayan Kingdom ruled  
by Namgyal Dynasty (1642-1975).  
o = Monarchs, known as Chogyals, governed under a  
  
Hereditary System.  
  
°  
India  
e Sikkim did Not immediately join India after independence. History  
e Under Indo — Sikkim Treaty (1950), Sikkim became an Indian 1642 1890  
Came under the rule of Became a protectorate  
Protectorate. iis Chogveldinasty state under the rule of  
the British  
  
o India controlled Defence, External Affairs and  
Cc . 1947 | 1975  
‘communications.  
  
Sikkim became a part of People of Sikkim rebelled  
  
India, as a result of which against the monarch  
  
5 : : Sikkim's foreign policy, which led to its official  
British Era Treaties security and communication ‘merger with India  
'e Treaty of Titaliya (1817): Granted British Strategic and Sere dere aes ee  
Commercial Influence. i dag spertrence.  
e Treaty of Tumlong (1861): Established Sikkim as a: Did You Know ?  
Protectorate of British India. \~ Awarded ‘Oscar for the Best Policy’ by the United Nations  
\- Bagged Future Policy Award 2018 for world’s best laws & policies  
e = Calcutta Convention (1890): Between British India and Qing promoting agro-ecology  
\- Ist fully organic state in the world with sustainable agricultural  
China to define Sikkim — Tibet Boundary. : ae F 2  
  
e Associate State Status (1974): 35" Constitutional Amendment  
Act 1974 granted Sikkim unique status ofan “Associate State” (1" and Only Instance in India).  
  
e Full Statehood (1975): A Referendum saw over 97% support for integration with India and Monarchy was Abolished.  
  
¢ 36"Constitutional Amendment Act (1975) made Sikkim 22™ State of India on 16 May 1975.  
o Article 371F: Protects Sikkim's Cultural Identity, Land Rights and Existing Laws.  
  
PERSON IN NEWS  
  
Lt Gen NS Raja Subramani appointed 3 CDS  
  
Government of India has appointed NS Raja Subramani as 3" Chief of Defence Staff, succeeding Anil Chauhan from 31 May  
2026\.  
  
e = Created in 2019.  
o Established following recommendations of Kargil Review Committee (1999) and Shekatkar Committee (2016).  
  
e Bipin Rawat became 1“ CDS in 2020.  
e Highest—ranking (4 - Star) Military Officer in Indian Armed Forces.  
o Equivalent in rank to 3 Service Chiefs but functions as “First Among Equals.”  
o Holds 12" Position in Indian Order of Precedence.  
e \~=Actsasa Key Institutional Bridge between Armed Forces and Civilian Political Leadership.  
  
e Appointed By: Appointments Committee of the Cabinet, chaired by tPrime Minister.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 72  
  
\=== PAGE 75 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Age Limit: Must be below 62 Years at time of appointment.  
e — Tenure: No Fixed Tenure for CDS.  
  
e Maximum Age for holding office is 65 Years.  
  
Roles and Responsibilities of CDS  
Principal Military Adviser: Advises Defence Minister on Tri— Service Military Matters.  
Department of Military Affairs: Functions as Secretary of Department of Military Affairs under Ministry of Defence.  
Permanent Chairman of Chiefs of Staff Committee: Ensures Continuity in Strategic Planning and Inter — Service  
  
Coordination.  
  
Promoting Jointness: Promotes Joint Military Operations, Integrated Logistics, Unified Training Systems and Better  
  
Resource Optimisation among Army, Navy, and Air Force.  
  
AWARDS  
  
2023 Military Gender Advocate of Year Award|  
Major Abhilasha Barak received UN Military Gender Advocate Award 2025 for advancing Gender Equality in Peacekeeping Missions  
  
in Lebanon (UNIFIL).  
  
Major Abhilasha Barak, 1“ Indian Woman Combat Helicopter Pilot,  
becomes India's 3" UN Gender Advocate Award Recipient, after Suman  
Gawani (2019) and Radhika Sen (2023).  
  
Created in 2016  
  
Recognises Efforts of a Military Peacekeeper in promoting  
Principles of 2000 Security Council Resolution.  
  
Given By: Office of Military Affairs within UN Department for  
Peace Operations.  
  
UN Peacekeeping  
  
Founded in 1948.  
  
A Tool employed by United Nations to help Countries navigate  
path from Conflict to Peace.  
  
Involves Deployment of Military, Police and Civilian Personnel to  
Regions affected by Conflicts or Political Instability.  
  
UN Peacekeeping Forces have an impressive record of  
  
peacekeeping achievements, including winning Nobel Peace Prize  
(1988).  
  
UN Peacekeepers are often referred to as Blue Berets or Blue  
Helmets.  
  
India and UN Peacekeeping  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
India is 4" Largest Troop Contributor.  
o India ranks 3" after Nepal and Bangladesh in Troops  
Contribution in Asia.  
  
India was 1“ Country to contribute to Trust Fund on Sexual  
Exploitation and Abuse, which was set up in 2016.  
  
Indian Army has established Centre for United Nations  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@  
  
\-e In 2007, India became 1“ Country to deploy a  
  
Principles of 2000 Security Council Resolution  
\- Calls for Protecting Women and Girls from  
  
Conflict — related Sexual Violence and sets  
Gender — related Responsibilities for UN.  
  
Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) Initiative  
Views Women, Peace and Security Agenda as  
critical to enhancing Peacekeeping Operations  
  
Performance through supporting Women's Full  
Participation in Peace Processes and making  
Peacekeeping more Gender — Responsive.  
  
India and Women in Peacekeeping  
  
All— Women Contingent to a UN Peacekeepin,  
Mission.  
Dr Kiran Bedi: UN's 1" Police Adviser.  
  
International Day of UN Peacekeepers  
©@ Observedon 29 May  
e This is the date when in 1948, I UN  
  
Peacekeeping Mission named “United Nation.  
bega  
  
Truce Supervision Organization”,  
operations in Palestine, to monitor Armistic:  
  
Agreement between Israel and its Ara  
  
neighbours.  
  
73  
  
\=== PAGE 76 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Peacekeeping (CUNPK) in New Delhi.  
  
e United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) is deployed in Jammu & Kashmir to supervise  
Ceasefire between India and Pakistan on 24 Jan 1949.  
  
\[International Booker Prize 2026\]  
  
Taiwan Travelogue won International Booker Prize 2026, marking 1“ Mandarin Chinese — translated Novel to receive prestigious  
literary award.  
  
Written by Taiwanese author Yang Shuang — Zi and translated by Lin King.  
  
In 2025, Heart Lamp by Banu Mushtaq, translated by Deepa Bhasthi, won the prize. It was 1 book translated from Kannada to receive  
this honor.  
  
e Formerly knownas Man Booker International Prize.  
  
e Presented annually for a Work of Fiction, either a Novel or a Collection of Short Stories that was Originally written in a Language  
Other Than English, then translated into English and published in U.K. and/or Ireland.  
  
Booker Prize  
e Separate Award given annually for Best Novel Written in English, published in UK or Ireland.  
  
Past Indian Booker Prize Winners: Arundhati Roy (God of Small Things), Kiran Desai (Inheritance of Loss) and  
Aravind Adiga (White Tiger).  
  
National Panchayat Awards 2025  
Ministry of Panchayati Raj announced winners of National Panchayat Awards 2025, with 42 Panchayats selected from 17 States and UTs.  
Karnataka won Highest Number of Awards (6) followed by Andhra Pradesh and Odisha secured 5 awards each.  
Kawrthah North Village Council received 'Clean and Green Panchayat Award’.  
e Launched in 2011.  
e Recognise Performance of Panchayats across 9 themes of Localised Sustainable Development Goals.  
e — Awarded under Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan framework.  
e Aim: Encourage Good Governance, Sustainable Rural Development, Grassroots Democratic Excellence.  
e Award Categories  
  
o \~-Nanaji Deshmukh Sarvottam Puraskar: For Overall Holistic Performance.  
  
o Deen Dayal Upadhyay Puraskar: For achievements related to Sustainable Development Goals.  
  
o Special Category Awards: Climate Action, Atma Nirbhar Panchayat, Capacity Building  
  
e Ministry of Panchayati Raj uses Panchayat Advancement Index to assess Panchayat Performance.  
  
Pulitzer Prize  
  
Anand RK and Suparna Sharma won Pulitzer Prize in Illustrated Reporting and Commentary Category for their report “trAPPed”,  
highlighting Psychological and Financial Impact of “Digital Arrest” Scams.  
  
A Member of Ghadar Party in America, Indian — American Journalist Gobind Behari Lal was 1" from India to win Pulitzer Prize for  
Journalism in 1937.  
  
e — 1\*awarded in 1917 through will of newspaper publisher Joseph Pulitzer.  
  
e Considered Highest National Honour in United States for Journalism, Literature, Musical Composition.  
  
¢ Often called “Gold Standard” of American Journalism.  
  
e Given ina total of 23 Categories, including 15 Categories of Journalism and 8 Categories of Books, Drama, Music etc.  
  
e Administered By: Columbia University  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 74  
  
\=== PAGE 77 ===  
{May 2026  
  
TOPIC  
. “in NEWS  
  
Sy eR  
  
INTERNATIONAL NEWS  
SEEDS Initiative  
  
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar inaugurated India — supported projects in Trinidad and Tobago under SEEDS initiative.  
e SEEDS stands for Supply of Equipment for Efficient Development of SMEs.  
  
e Indian Developmental Cooperation Initiative aimed at supporting Small and Medium Enterprises in Countries of Global  
South.  
  
e Implemented By: Ministry of External Affairs  
  
POLITY AND GOVERNANCE  
  
National AI Skilling Programme for Creative Sector  
  
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in collaboration with Indian Institute of Creative Technologies, launched a National  
AI Skilling Initiative for Creative Sector.  
  
e¢ Objective: To build Industry — Ready AI Capabilities in India's Creative Industries.  
  
e Aim: To strengthen India's Growing Creative Economy and Digital Content Ecosystem.  
e Target Sectors: Media, Animation, Gaming, Digital Storytelling, Content Creation  
  
e Developed in partnership with Google and YouTube.  
  
e Implementing Agency: Indian Institute of Creative Technologies  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
India's 1° Human — Elephant Conflict Research Centre’  
  
Jharkhand is set to establish India's 1“ dedicated Human — Elephant Conflict Research Centre at Palamu Tiger Reserve.  
e Project Elephant (1992): Launched by Government of India to protect Elephants, conserve Habitats and Corridors.  
e Haathi Mere Saathi Campaign: Promote Coexistence between Humans and Elephants.  
  
o Reduce Retaliatory Violence through Public Awareness, Community Sensitisation, Conservation Education.  
  
e Project RE — HAB (Reducing Elephant — Human Attacks using Bees) implemented by Khadi and Village Industries  
Commission.  
  
Mission Mausam  
  
Ministry of Earth Sciences inaugurated India's 1“ Urban Testbed and Aerosol Observatory by Indian Institute of Tropical  
Meteorology in Chennai under Mission Mausam.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 75  
  
\=== PAGE 78 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Ailet Corner — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
It is an Integrated Atmospheric Monitoring System designed for Real — Time Urban Weather Observation, Air Quality  
Monitoring, Aerosol Tracking and Climate—related Research.  
  
e Flagship Initiative of Ministry of Earth Sciences.  
e = Objective: To make India “Weather — Ready” and “Climate — Smart”.  
  
e Focus Areas: Improved Weather Forecasting, Advanced Climate Modelling, Early Warning Systems, Disaster Risk  
Reduction, Urban Climate Resilience  
  
DEFENCE  
  
Kalam & Kavach 3.0  
3” edition of Kalam & Kavach 3.0 Defence Conference was held in New Delhi.  
  
e Serves as a High — level Platform for deliberations on India's Defence Transformation, Military Modernisation and  
Future Preparedness.  
  
e = Theme: “Taking JAI Forward With P?”  
o JAI: Jointness, Aatmanirbharta, Innovation  
oP: Indigenisation, International Collaboration  
e Organised By: Ministry of Defence  
Defence Research and Development Organisation & Indian Air Force successfully conducted maiden flight trial of TARA  
Weapon System.  
  
e TARA stands for Tactical Advanced Range Augmentation.  
e India's 1“ Indigenous Glide Weapon System.  
  
e Modular Range — Extension Kit that can be attached to an Existing Unguided Warhead to convert it into a Precision —  
Guided Weapon.  
  
SUMMITS, REP 5 AND INDICES  
Article 24 of ILO  
  
Tea Plantation Workers in West Bengal invoked Article 24 of Constitution of International Labour Organization alleging Labour  
  
Rights Violations in Tea Estates.  
Tea Act 1953 established Tea Board to regulate Cultivation, Production, Sale and Export of Indian Tea.  
  
e Acts as an International Accountability Mechanism for Labour Rights.  
  
e Formal Mechanism through which Industrial Associations of Workers or Employers' Organisations can file a Complaint  
against a Member Country for failing to implementa Ratified ILO Convention.  
  
European Central Bank  
  
Reserve Bank of India and European Central Bank signed revised MoU to enhance cooperation in Banking Supervision and  
Financial Regulation.  
  
e Central Bank of Eurozone.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 76  
  
\=== PAGE 79 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Ailet Corner  
  
o Eurozone: Group of European Union Countries that use Euro as their Official Currency.  
\= Consists of 21 Member Countries using Euro Currency.  
\= Recent Additions: Croatia (2023) and Bulgaria (2026).  
e Established in 1998 under Maastricht Treaty.  
¢ Collectively owned by National Central Banks of All27 EU Member States.  
e =HQ: Frankfurt  
  
Border Roads Organisation\]  
BRO celebrated 66" Raising Day of Project Deepak (1961 | Western Himalayas).  
  
e Established: 1960  
  
e India's Premier Agency for Border Infrastructure.  
  
e \~=Works in High—Altitude, Remote and Strategically Sensitive Areas.  
e DG: Raghu Srinivasan  
  
e HQ:New Delhi  
  
National Crime Records Bureau  
  
National Crime Records Bureau released Crime in India 2024 report, 1“ edition to include offences registered under Bharatiya  
Nyaya Sanhita alongside IPC.  
  
e Established in 1986.  
e Based on recommendations of Tandon Committee and National Police Commission.  
e Acts as India's Central Repository of Crime and Criminal Data.  
  
e Functions under Ministry of Home A ffairs.  
  
PERSON IN NEWS  
  
Veera Pasi  
  
Statue of Veera Pasi unveiled in Raebareli, reviving recognition of 1857 Revolt's Regional Resistance Heroes.  
.© Warrior from Pasi Community of Uttar Pradesh.  
e — Served as a commander under Rana Beni Madhav Baksh Singh.  
  
e Remembered asa Dalit Freedom Fighter who participated in Revolt of 1857 against British Colonial Rule.  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 77  
  
\=== PAGE 80 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current AffairsMay20260——————ssss—‘;S SO rtortil =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Notes  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 78  
  
\=== PAGE 81 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current AffairsMay20260——————ssss—‘;S SO rtortil =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Notes  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 79  
  
\=== PAGE 82 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current AffairsMay20260——————ssss—‘;S SO rtortil =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Notes  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 80  
  
\=== PAGE 83 ===  
LIMITED SEATS AVAILABLE  
MERIT-BASED SCHOLARSHIPS  
  
SECURE YOUR PLACE WITH AN APPLICABLE ON ONLINE &  
OFFLINE COURSES  
  
BASED ON YOUR PERFORMANCE  
  
REGISTER NOW  
  
\=== PAGE 84 ===  
SCAN QR FOR SCAN QR FOR  
CLAT 2027 CLAT 2028  
  
JAIPUR : S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar  
(M) 7240060099  
  
JODHPUR : EC-22A, First Floor, Opp. Steel Bhawan,  
  
www. lawpreptutorial.com Shastri Circle, (M) 76659 44999  
  
¢ Jodhpur ¢ Jaipur \* North Delhi \* South Delhi \* Gurgaon \* Noida \* Patna \* Ahmedabad \* Chandigarh \* Karnale Mumbai Pune ¢ Faridabad  
¢ Lucknow ¢ Kanpur ¢ Agra ¢ Varanasi \* Prayagraj \* Dehradun \* Bhopal ¢ Indore \* Gwalior \* Jabalpur ¢ Raipur Bhilai \* Ranchi \* Jamshedpur  
¢ Bangalore \* Kolkata \* Muzaffarpur \* Ghaziabad \* Nagpur \* Jammu « Bathinda \* Rewari \* Mysore \* Ernakulam \* Chennai \* Hyderabad  
  