=== PAGE 5 ===
  
"May 2026  
  
«', TOPIC  
’ in NEWS  
  
PM MODI  
VISIT TO  
5 NATIONS  
  
Why in News?  
PM Modi's Visit to UAE and Europe highlights Key Diplomatic and Strategic Significance across Multiple Partner Nations.  
  
Key Outcomes of UAE's Visit  
  
Energy & Strategic Petroleum Cooperation: MoU signed between Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited and Abu Dhabi  
National Oil Company for strategic collaboration.  
  
© Proposal to store up to 30 Million Barrels of ADNOC Crude Oil in India's Strategic Petroleum Reserves.  
  
o Discussions on storing Crude Oil in Fujairah as part of India's Overseas Strategic Reserve Framework.  
  
LPG Supply Security: Strategic collaboration agreement between Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Abu Dhabi National Oil  
Company.  
  
o Potential long— term LPG Sale Agreement between ADNOC Gas Limited and IOCL.  
  
Defence & Maritime Cooperation: Framework advanced for a Strategic Defence Partnership.  
  
o MoU between Cochin Shipyard Limited and Drydocks World to establish a Ship Repair Cluster at Vadinar.  
  
o Cooperation includes offshore fabrication under Maritime Development Fund Scheme.  
  
AI & Supercomputing: Term sheet signed for setting up 8 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters.  
  
o Partnership between Centre for Development of Advanced Computing and G42 under India's AI Mission.  
  
Investment Cooperation: Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and National Infrastructure and Investment Fund to explore  
investments up to US$1 Billion in India's Infrastructure Sector.  
  
India — UAE Bilateral Relations  
  
Trade e FY 2025 — 26: US$ 100 Billion  
o 3% Largest Trade Partner after China and US.  
o 2™ Largest Export Destination of India, after US.  
e 3" Largest Crude Oil Source.  
¢ 3" Largest Supplier of LNG & 2™ Largest Supplier of LPG.  
e UAE is Only Nation participating in India’s Strategic Reserve  
Programme.  
  
Comprehensive Economic  
Partnership Agreement  
  
NRI Remittances  
  
In 2022, India became 1“ Country with which UAE signed Comprehensive  
Economic Partnership Agreement  
  
UAE accounted for 18% of India's Remittance Flows.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 03  
  
\
=== PAGE 6 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News \[— Tutorial\]  
Defence e Desert Cyclone (Military), Zayed Talwar (Naval) and Desert Eagle (Air  
Force)  
e India’s access to UAE’s Al Dhafra Air Base for Refuelling.  
Multilateral Cooperation e 12U2 (India — Israel - UAE — USA)  
e BRICS  
Cultural e MoU for Cooperation aimed at supporting of "Maritime Heritage  
  
Complex" at Lothal (Gujarat)  
e BAPS Hindu Temple: UAE’s 1\* Traditional Hindu Stone Temple located  
  
in Abu Dhabi.  
  
e Indian Nationals form Largest Expatriate Community within UAE.  
  
United Arab Emirates  
  
e Federal, Elective Monarchy composed of 7°  
Emirates  
e Shares Land Borders with Oman and Saudi Arabia.  
o Maritime Borders in Persian Gulf with Qatar  
and Iran & with Oman in Gulf of Oman.  
e President: Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan  
  
e Prime Minister: Mohammed bin Rashid Al  
Maktoum  
  
© Currency: Dirham  
Capital: Abu Dhabi  
  
The Kafala System  
  
The Kafala system, meaning  
“sponsorship" in Arabic, is used in Gulf  
countries like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,  
Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, and the UAE.  
  
Kafala regulates the relationship  
between employers and migrant  
workers, requiring foreign workers to  
  
have an in-country sponsor, typically their  
employer.  
  
This sponsor controls the worker's visa |  
and legal status. Workers cannot change  
  
jobs or leave the country without the  
  
sponsor's permission, leading to  
  
potential exploitation, non-payment of  
  
wages, poor working conditions, and  
  
restricted freedom of movement.  
  
Extra Shorts  
  
World's Largest Airport Terminal: Al Maktoum International Airport (Jebel Ali, Dubai, UAE).  
Arab World's 1" Nuclear Power Plant: Barakah Nuclear Power Plant  
BAPS Hindu Temple: I" Hindu Stone Temple Abu Dhabi (UAE)  
Awarded Highest Civilian Award of UAE called 'Order of Zayed’ in 2019.  
  
PM Modi Visit to Norway  
  
PM Modi undertook 1“ Bilateral Visit by an Indian PM to Norway (Capital: Oslo  
  
PM: Jonas Gahr Store) in 43 Years.  
  
PM Modi participated in 3" India — Nordic Summit held in Oslo (Norway) after  
  
1“in Stockholm (2018) and 2™ in Copenhagen (2022).  
  
e India and Norway upgraded ties to a Green Strategic Partnership, focusing  
on Clean Energy Transition, Climate Resilience, Blue Economy, Green  
  
Shipping.  
  
Norway  
  
|e Located on Scandinavian Peninsula  
  
e Famous for Fjords (Glacial Sea Inlets,  
  
e Not in EU, but part of Europeai  
Economic Area (EEA) and NATO  
  
e@ PM Modi awarded Norway's Highest Civilian Honour, Grand Cross of Royal Norwegian Order of Merit.  
  
¢ Norway formally joined India's Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 04  
  
\
=== PAGE 7 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
India and Italy (Capital: Rome | PM: Giorgia Meloni) upgraded bilateral relations to a Special Strategic Partnership.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
Nordic Countries India — Norway Relations  
Group of Countries in Northern Europe. ; : India— EFTA TEPA signed (2024).  
Norwegian Sovereign Wealth Fund  
(GPFG): \~USD 28 billion invested in India.  
India's Himadri Station (Svalbard) in  
  
Core Nordic Countries: Denmark, Finland,  
Iceland (Least Populous), Norway, Sweden  
(Most Populous)  
  
Autonomous Territories: Faroe Islands Norway (2008).  
(Denmark), Greenland (Denmark), Aland India is an Arctic Council Observer (since  
Islands (Finland) 2013).  
  
PM Modi Visit to Italy  
  
Key Outcomes  
India and Italy committed to increasing bilateral trade to €20 billion by 2029.  
  
Both Nations committed support for India — Middle East — Europe Economic Corridor (IMEEC) which aims to  
improve Trade Connectivity, Logistics, Energy and Digital Links between Asia and Europe.  
  
Italy Calls India' Programme: To connect Indian Students studying in Italy with Internships, Skill Development and  
Corporate Employment Opportunities.  
  
Year 2027 declared as 'Year of Culture and Tourism between India and Italy' to commemorate 80 years o  
diplomatic relations.  
  
PM Modi was conferred Agricola Medal by Food and Agriculture Organization.  
  
India — Italy Ties  
  
Italy is India's 4" Largest Trading Partner in EU.  
  
India — Italy — Japan Trilateral (2021): Focuses on Indo — Pacific  
Security, Stability, Multilateral Cooperation.  
  
o It became India's 2" Indo — Pacific Trilateral involving a  
  
Joint Strategic Action Plan (2025 — 29): Roadmap covering  
Defence, Economy, Connectivity, Science & Innovation,  
  
Food and Agriculture Organization  
  
|e Founded: 16 October 1945  
  
¢ Specialized Agency of UN.  
  
e Leading Global Body for Hunger  
Eradication and Food Security.  
  
e Members: 195 Countries (194 + EU)  
  
e HQ: Rome, Italy  
  
European Country after India—France—Australia.  
  
Migration, Space, Energy Transition.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
05  
  
\
=== PAGE 8 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News — Tutorial =  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Italy joined International Solar Alliance, Global Biofuel Alliance, IMEEC Initiative.  
  
Indian Diaspora in Italy: Largest Indian Community in European Union.  
  
Colosseum  
  
Located in Rome, Italy  
  
Originally called Flavian Amphitheatre.  
Rang Ghar  
e Knownas Colosseum of the East.  
© One of Asia's Oldest Surviving  
Amphitheatres.  
e Built By: Ahoms  
¢ Constructed by Swargadeo Rudra Singha  
  
Built under Flavian dynasty Emperor Vespasian and Completed  
by Titus.  
  
Constructed between 70—80 AD.  
  
Largest Ancient Amphitheatre ever built and Largest Standing  
Amphitheatre in the world.  
  
Declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site (1980) included among  
New Seven Wonders of the World (2007).  
  
and rebuilt by Swargadeo Pramatta Singha.  
Located in Sivasagar, Assam.  
  
India-Middle East-Europe  
Economic Corridor (IMEC)  
  
TORKIYE  
  
Piraeus Ove, Halfa  
\> i ISRAEL  
  
Riyadh  
Jebel Ali  
  
Al-Haditha  
  
o  
SAUDI  
ARABIA  
  
Haradh  
  
Al Ghuwaifat  
  
\[India — Netherlands Strategic Partnership  
  
PM Modi visited Netherlands (Capital: Amsterdam | PM: Rob Jetten | Rotterdam: Largest Port in Europe).  
  
Anaimangalam Copper Plates (Leiden Plates) returned by Netherlands to India.  
  
Afsluitdijk Dam visited by PM Modi to strengthen India — Netherlands Cooperation in Water Management, Climate Resilience  
and Sustainable Infrastructure.  
  
Netherlands serves as India's Gateway to Europe and ranks among Country's Top 4 Sources of FDI.  
Semiconductor Cooperation: MoU between Tata Electronics and ASML.  
  
o Supports India's Semiconductor Plant in Dholera (Gujarat)  
  
“Brain Bridge” Initiative: Dutch Universities partnered with Indian Institutions such as IIT Delhi and IISc for  
Semiconductor Research, Talent Development, Advanced Technology Collaboration.  
  
Cultural Diplomacy: Leiden University restituted 11" Century Chola Copper Plates to India.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 06  
  
\
=== PAGE 9 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
India and Sweden elevated bilateral ties to Strategic Partnership  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Anaimangalam Copper Plates  
  
\_ Plates were acquired around 1700 CE by Dutch missionary Florentius Camper during rule of Dutch East India Company |  
\_ over Coromandel Coast.  
  
e — 11" Century Royal Charters commissioned by Rajaraja Chola I and later engraved during reign of Rajendra Chola.  
¢ = Collection consists of 21 Large and 3 Smaller Copper Sheets.  
o Larger Plates are bound by a Bronze Loop displaying Chola Emblem: Tiger (Cholas), Fish (Pandyas), Bow  
(Cheras).  
o. Smaller Sheets belong to Kulottunga Chola 1.  
e Inscriptions record Land and Revenue grants made to Chulamanivarma Vihara Buddhist Monastery (Nagapattinam).  
o Monastery was built by Sri Mara Vijayotunga Varman of Srivijaya Kingdom (Indonesia).  
e Inscriptions are written in Tamil (Chola Genealogy) and Sanskrit (Administrative and Revenue Details).  
o Sanskrit sections contain Invocations and Chola Genealogy.  
  
eo Tamil sections provide Administrative and Revenue Details.  
  
Afsluitdijk Dam Kalpasar Project  
  
e 32 km long Barrier Dam and Causeway : Proposed Mega Water — Management and.  
located in Netherlands. Freshwater Storage Project in Gujarat.  
  
. Will create World's Largest Freshwater Reservoir.  
e Protects Large Low — Lying Areas of | .  
Aim: To construct a Massive Dam across Gulf o,  
  
Netherlands from flooding caused by North  
  
Khambhat.  
Sea. Objective: Freshwater Storage, Flood Control,  
e Transformed Saline Zuiderzee Inlet into Climate Resilience, Irrigation Support an  
Freshwater LJsselmeer Lake. Regional Development.  
  
India — Sweden Upgrade Ties to Strategic Partnership  
  
during official visit of PM Modi to Sweden (Capital: Stockholm | PM: Extra Shots  
UlfKristersson). -e India and Sweden launched Leadershi  
  
Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT) at Ul  
Climate Action Summit in 2019.  
  
PM Modi received Sweden's Royal Order of Polar Star and  
  
Commander Grand Cross, the Highest Recognition and Honour  
  
that can be conferred upon a Head of Government. o LeadIT promotes Low — Carbo  
  
. . ‘ Industrial Transition and Sustainabl.  
o This marks PM Modi's 31“ Global Honour.  
  
Manufacturing Practices.  
  
Both Nations adopted India — Sweden Joint Action Plan 2026 —  
2030 which lays out Roadmap for Cooperation.  
  
India and Sweden endorsed joint development of India— Sweden Technology and Artificial Intelligence Corridor (SITAC).  
  
Both Nations agreed to establish an India - Sweden SME and Start — up Platform to support Innovation — driven  
Entrepreneurship.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 07  
  
\
=== PAGE 10 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
PM Modi's visit to Norway was the first bilateral visit by an Indian Prime Minister in how many years?  
(a) 25 years (b) 33 years (c) 43 years (d) 50 years  
  
India and Norway upgraded their bilateral ties to which kind of partnership during PM Modi's visit?  
(a) Comprehensive Economic Partnership (b) Green Strategic Partnership  
(c) Special Strategic Partnership (d) Blue Economy Partnership  
  
The 3rd India—Nordic Summit was held in which city?  
(a) Stockholm (b) Helsinki (c) Copenhagen (d) Oslo  
  
India's Arctic research station 'Himadri' is located in which Norwegian territory?  
(a) Bergen (b) Tromso (c) Svalbard (d) Lofoten Islands  
  
Which MoU was signed between India and UAE regarding strategic petroleum cooperation?  
(a) ONGC and ADNOC MoU for refinery expansion  
  
(b) Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Ltd and ADNOC for strategic collaboration  
  
(c) BPCL and ADNOC for crude supply  
  
(d) GAIL and ADNOC for natural gas storage  
  
India proposed to store how many barrels of ADNOC crude oil in its Strategic Petroleum Reserves?  
(a) 10 million barrels (b) 20 million barrels  
(c) 30 million barrels (d) 50 million barrels  
  
UAE's bilateral trade with India in FY 2025-26 stands at approximately:  
(a) US$ 50 Billion (b) US$ 75 Billion  
(c) US$ 100 Billion (d) US$ 120 Billion  
  
Which AI & Supercomputing agreement was signed between C-DAC and G42 during PM Modi's UAE visit?  
(a) 4 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters (b) 6 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters  
(c) 8 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters (d) 12 Exaflop Super Computing Clusters  
  
In 2022, UAE became the first country with which India signed which agreement?  
(a) Free Trade Agreement (FTA) (b) Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA)  
(c) Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) (d) Strategic Trade Agreement (STA)  
  
PM Modi was conferred the Agricola Medal by FAO. Georgius Agricola is known as the Father of:  
(a) Agriculture (b) Mineralogy (c) Botany (d) Economics  
  
India and Italy upgraded their bilateral relations to which level during PM Modi's visit?  
(a) Comprehensive Economic Partnership (b) Enhanced Defence Partnership  
(c) Special Strategic Partnership (d) Full Diplomatic Union  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 08  
  
\
=== PAGE 11 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
12\.  
  
14\.  
  
19\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Which corridor, supported by both India and Italy, aims to connect Asia and Europe through improved trade and  
logistics?  
  
(a) Trans-Caspian Trade Route  
  
(b) India—Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor (IMEEC)  
  
(c) Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)  
  
(d) INSTC Corridor  
  
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), headquartered in Rome, was founded on:  
(a) 16 October 1945 (b) 24 October 1945 (c) 1 January 1948 (d) 10 December 1948  
  
An MoU was signed between Tata Electronics and which Dutch company to support India's semiconductor plant in  
Dholera (Gujarat)?  
(a) Philips (b) NXP Semiconductors (c) ASML (d) IMEC  
  
The Anaimangalam Copper Plates (Leiden Plates) returned to India by Netherlands were originally commissioned by:  
(a) Vikramaditya II (b) Pulakesi II (c) Rajaraja Chola I (d) Krishnadevaraya  
  
The Afsluitdijk Dam in Netherlands transformed the Zuiderzee Inlet into which freshwater lake?  
(a) Lake Markermeer (b) LJsselmeer Lake (c) Grevelingenmeer (d) Veluwe Lake  
  
Netherlands ranks among India's top sources of FDI and serves as India's:  
(a) Largest trade partner in EU (b) Gateway to Europe  
(c) Primary defence supplier in Europe (d) Largest source of remittances in Europe  
  
What honour did PM Modi receive from Sweden during his official visit?  
(a) Order of the Seraphim  
  
(b) Order of Vasa  
  
(c) Royal Order of Polar Star and Commander Grand Cross  
  
(d) King's Medal of Merit  
  
India and Sweden jointly launched which initiative at the UN Climate Action Summit in 2019?  
(a) Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI)  
  
(b) Leadership Group for Industry Transition (LeadIT)  
  
(c) International Solar Alliance (ISA)  
  
(d) Global Biofuel Alliance (GBA)  
  
India and Sweden endorsed the joint development of which technology corridor during PM Modi's Sweden visit?  
(a) India-Sweden Digital Economy Bridge (SDEB)  
  
(b) India-Sweden Green Tech Corridor (SGTC)  
  
(c) India-Sweden Technology and Artificial Intelligence Corridor (SITAC)  
  
(d) India—Sweden Smart Manufacturing Corridor (SSMC)  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 09  
  
\
