=== PAGE 25 ===
  
iP “May 2026  
  
‘gs, TOPIC  
DF inNEWS  
  
INCREASE IN  
SUPREME COURT  
JUDGE STRENGTH  
  
Why in News?  
  
Union Cabinet of India Approved Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Bill 2026 to expand strength of  
Supreme Court of India from 34 to 38 Judges (CJI + 37 Judges).  
  
Article 124 empowers Parliament to increase Number of Supreme Court Judges by law.  
  
Legal Framework  
\-e Governed by Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956.  
  
e = Any Increase requires Amendment Bill passed by Both Houses of Parliament with Simple Majority Sufficient and  
Presidential Assent.  
  
Union Judiciary (Supreme Court)  
  
e Inaugurated on "Jan 28, 1950".  
o Succeeded "Federal Court of India", established under "Government of India Act of 1935".  
e "Apex Court" of Indian Judicial System.  
  
o Replaced "British Privy Council" as "Highest Court of Appeal".  
  
e "Articles 124 to 147" in "Part 5" of Constitution deals with Organisation, Independence, Jurisdiction, Powers, Procedures  
and so on of Supreme Court.  
  
e Acts as "Final Interpreter and Guardian of Indian Constitution".  
e Presently, it consists of "Chief Justice and 37 Other Judges".  
o Originally, Strength of Supreme Court was fixed at "8" (1 Chief Justice and 7 Other Judges).  
  
o "Parliament" may increase Number of Judges if it deems necessary.  
  
Significance  
\_e Faster Disposal of Cases: Helps Reduce Massive Judicial Backlog  
e = Timely Justice Delivery: Improves Efficiency in Constitutional & Civil Matters.  
e Better Bench Formation: Easier Constitution of Constitution Benches, Special Benches and Larger Benches  
for Important Cases.  
Strengthening Judicial Capaci  
  
: Addresses Rising Litigation Burden  
  
Appointment of Judges — Article 124 (2)  
  
e Judges of Supreme Court are appointed by President.  
  
e CJL is appointed by President after “Consultation” with Such Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts as he deems  
necessary.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 23  
  
\
=== PAGE 26 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
o Normally, "Senior Most Judge of Supreme Court" is  
  
Qualifications  
/e Shouldbe a "Citizen of India".  
  
e Should have been a "Judge of a High Court" (o:  
High Courts in Succession) for "5 Years"; or  
  
appointed as "Chief Justice of India".  
  
co Although, there is "No Constitutional Requirement" to  
do so.  
  
Other Judges are appointed by the President after  
  
Consultation with the CJI and Such Other Judges of the  
Supreme Court and the High Courts as he deems necessary.  
  
o Should have been an "Advocate of a Hig  
Court" (or High Courts in succession) for "1  
  
. . . . Years"; or  
o While appointing Other Judges, "President" is bound to  
  
o Should be a "Distinguished Jurist" in opinio:  
of "President".  
  
consult "CJI and Other Senior Judges", if he deems  
proper.  
  
Violation of Convention related to Appointment of CJI  
\- Justice from 1950 to 1973, practice has been to appoint “Seniormost Judge of Supreme Court” as “Chief justice of |  
India”.  
e = This established convention was violated in “1973” when "AN Ray" was appointed as "Chief Justice of India" by |  
superseding "3 Senior Judges" (JM Shelat, KS Hegde, AN Grover). :  
e = Again in “1977”, "MU Beg" was appointed as ‘Chief Justice of India” by superseding then “Senior Most  
Judge” (HR Khanna).  
This "Discretion of Government" was curtailed by Supreme Court in “2" Judges Case" (1993), in which Supreme  
Court ruled that “‘Seniormost Judge of Supreme Court” should alone be appointed to office of ‘‘Chief Justice of  
» India”.  
  
Controversy over Consultation  
  
1" Judges Case (1981): "Consultation" does "Not Mean  
  
Concurrence" and it "Only Implies Exchange of Views". Tenure of Judges  
  
2™ Judges Case (1993): SC reversed its earlier ruling and changed  
Minimum Age" is for Appointment of a Judge.  
  
meaning of word "Consultation to Concurrence".  
¢ Holds office until he attains age of "65 years".  
  
o Hence, it ruled that "Advice" tendered by "Chief Justice of  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
: Constitution has "Not Fixed" Tenure and "No:  
  
e Resign from his office by writing to  
  
India" is "Binding" on "President" in matters of Appointment  
  
of Judges of Supreme Court.  
  
o Chief Justice would tender his advice on matter after  
  
consulting 2 of his Seniormost Colleagues.  
  
3" Judges Case (1998): SC opined that "Consultation"  
Process to be adopted by "Chief Justice of India" requires  
"Consultation of Plurality Judges".  
o “Sole Opinion of Chief Justice of India” does “Not  
Constitute Consultation Process”.  
o Heshould consult a Collegium of “4 Seniormost Judges  
of Supreme Court".  
\= If2 Judges give an Adverse Opinion, he should Not  
Send recommendation to Government.  
  
"President".  
¢ Removed from his office by "President" on  
"Recommendation of Parliament".  
  
Composition of NJAC  
CJI: Ex— Officio Chairperson  
2 Seniormost SC Judges: Ex— Officio Members  
“Union Minister of Law and Justice” as Ex  
Officio Member  
“2 Eminent Persons” from Civil Society to b  
nominated by CJI, PM, Leader of Opposition i  
  
Lok Sabha  
  
o One of Eminent Persons to be Nominated from  
SC/ST/OBC/Minorities or Women.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
24  
  
\
=== PAGE 27 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance \[= Tutorial = “|  
  
e 4" Judges Case (2015): "99" Constitutional Amendment Act of 2014" and "National Judicial Appointments Commission Act  
of 2014" have replaced "Collegium System" of appointing Judges to Supreme Court and High Courts with a new body called  
"National Judicial Appointments Commission".  
  
o However, in "2015", Supreme Court has declared both 99" Constitutional Amendment as well as NJAC Act as  
"Unconstitutional and Void".  
  
o SCopined that NJAC would affect "Independence of Judiciary".  
  
Extra Shots  
  
\_ Amidst Charges of Corruption, Land — Grab and Abuse of Judicial Office, "PD Dinakaran", Chief Justice of  
| Sikkim High Court, against whom Rajya Sabha Chairman had set up a Judicial Panel to look into Allegations of  
  
: Corruption, resigned in 2011, before impeachment proceedings could be initiated against him.  
  
Acting Chief Justice (Article 126)  
\-e “President” can appoint a “Judge of Supreme Court” as an Acting Chief Justice of India when:  
o Office of Chief Justice of India is “Vacant” or “Temporarily Absent” or “Unable to Perform Duties”.  
Ad — Hoc Judge (Article 127)  
  
When there is a "Lack of Quorum of Permanent Judges" to hold or continue Any Session of Supreme Court, "Chief :  
Justice of India" can appoint a "Judge of a High Court" as an "Ad Hoc Judge" of Supreme Court for a "Temporary :  
Period".  
o Hecando so "Only After Consultation" with "Chief Justice of High Court concerned" and with "Previous  
  
Consent of the President".  
  
Retired Judges (Article 128)  
  
"CJI" can request a "Retired Judge of Supreme Court" or a "Retired Judge of a High Court" to act as a "Judge of |  
  
Supreme Court" for a "Temporary Period". :  
o Hecandoso only with "Previous Consent of President" and also of "Person" to be so appointed.  
  
A: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
| Polity and Governance  
  
e Union Cabinet approved 2 New Semiconductor Plants in Gujarat, including India's 1“ Commercial Gallium  
Nitride (GaN) Mini /Micro—LED Display Facility at Dholera.  
  
e India's 1“ Private (Geomysore Services India Pvt Ltd) Gold Mining Project set for launch in Kurnool (Andhra  
Pradesh), backed by Thriveni Earthmovers and Deccan Gold.  
  
e All India Institute of Medical Sciences (Delhi) introduced India's 1“ Portable MRI System for ICU and  
Emergency Patients.  
  
e India launched its 1“ Multi—Lane Free Flow Tolling System in Gujarat.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 25  
  
\
=== PAGE 28 ===
  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
| JURISDICTIONS OF SUPREME COURT OF INDIA  
  
Apellate Jusridiction Original Jusridiction  
  
The cases come to the Supreme  
Court in the form of appeals  
against the judgments of the  
  
lower courts and this is called  
appellate jurisdiction.  
  
Appeals from High Courts can be Article 131: The SC has original  
made whether in civil, criminal or Jurisdiction in matters related to  
  
other proceedings if the High Court any dispute between:  
certifies under Article 134A that the  
case involves a substantial question Government of VS One or  
of law as to the interpretation of India More States  
this Constitution.  
  
Article 32: The SC can be  
approached directly for remedy  
  
in case of Violation of  
Fundamental Rights.  
  
Article 132: Appeals in civil, crimi- Governmentof yg state(s)  
nal or other proceedings. India + State(s)  
  
Article 132: Appeals in regard to  
  
civil matters. State(s) VS — State(s)  
  
Article 134: Appeals in regard to =  
  
Gahitall mente, Dispute should involve a question whether  
  
of law or fact on which the existence or  
extent of a legal right depends.  
  
Advisory Jusridiction  
The President can refer a i ager oa ied  
question to the Supreme Court for Article 143  
consideration and seek the opinion of the  
Supreme court if he feel that it is of public  
importance or such a nature that requires  
  
the opinion of the Supreme Court.  
  
The opinion of the Supreme  
Court is NOT Binding on  
the President of India.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 26  
  
\
=== PAGE 29 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
REMOVAL  
PROCESS  
  
ey oo)  
  
Aly Judges Enquiry Act (1968)  
governs the removal procedure  
for SC and HC judges.  
  
————r\[—™=™ 7  
) GROUNDS \\  
Be initiation FOR  
Requires a motion signed by \\  
Tiel tithe | REMOVAL  
PRT arith  
LOO Mest pOMEsiN Constitutional Provisions:  
Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha ARTICLE 124(4)  
5  
ARTICLE 218  
  
a A it Provide the legal basis  
  
CJlor High \_ Distinguished r ‘  
SCjudge CourtCJ jurist  
  
\~\~  
  
Tasks: Investigates charges, fF  
examines evidence, cross-examines  
witnesses, and reports findings to  
the Speaker/Chairperson.  
  
Parliamentary Vote  
  
¢ Approval by of members  
\[present and voting Eat  
(eye Fran y-ed)in both Houses.  
\* If both Houses agree, @ENECnY  
  
issues the removal order.  
  
Termination of Proceedings  
  
If the committee finds  
no guilt, proceedings  
are dropped.  
  
\* Process is identical for Supreme  
Court and High Court judges.  
  
Criteria:  
  
Removal is permitted  
on grounds of  
proven misbehaviour or  
incapacity.  
  
Tr  
  
The Constitution does  
not use the word  
‘impeachment’ for judges.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
LAW PREP ——oxino  
  
\>  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
CASES OF JUDICIAL  
IMPEACHMENT  
  
Justice Ramaswami (1993)  
  
Accused of financial  
impropriety. Motion  
failed as LS abstained  
from voting.  
  
Justice Soumitra Sen (2011)  
  
Guilty of corruption,  
impeached in RS but  
resigned before LS  
discussion.  
  
Justice S. K. Gangele (2015)  
  
Justice Pardiwala (2015)  
  
Motion dropped after  
controversial remarks  
on reservations were  
expunged.  
  
Cleared bya  
committee on  
sexual harassment  
charges.  
  
Justice C. V. Nagarjuna (2017)  
  
Accused of victimizing a  
Dalit judge and financial  
misconduct, the motion  
failed due to lack of  
signatures.  
  
27  
  
\
=== PAGE 30 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
10\.  
  
1\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
The Union Cabinet approved a bill to expand the strength of the Supreme Court from 34 to how many judges?  
(a) 36 Judges (b) 38 Judges (c) 40 Judges (d) 42 Judges  
  
Which Article of the Indian Constitution empowers Parliament to increase the number of Supreme Court Judges?  
(a) Article 120 (b) Article 122 (c) Article 124 (d) Article 131  
  
Increasing the number of Supreme Court judges is governed by which Act?  
(a) Supreme Court (Judges) Act, 1950 (b) Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956  
(c) Judiciary Reform Act, 1960 (d) Supreme Court Administration Act, 1947  
  
What type of majority is required in Parliament to pass the Amendment Bill for increasing Supreme Court judges?  
(a) Two-thirds Special Majority (b) Absolute Majority  
(c) Simple Majority (d) Three-fourths Majority  
  
The Supreme Court of India was inaugurated on which date?  
(a) January 26, 1950 (b) January 28, 1950 (c) August 15, 1947 (d) November 26, 1949  
  
The Supreme Court of India succeeded which court that was established under the Government of India Act, 1935?  
(a) British Privy Council (b) Allahabad High Court  
(c) Federal Court of India (d) King's Bench Division  
  
What was the original strength of the Supreme Court when it was established?  
(a) 4 judges (b) 6 judges (c) 8 judges (d) 10 judges  
  
Articles 124 to 147 in which Part of the Constitution deal with the Supreme Court?  
(a) Part 3 (b) Part 4 (c) Part 5 (d) Part 6  
  
Which of the following is NOT a prescribed qualification for appointment as a Supreme Court Judge?  
(a) Judge of a High Court for 5 years (b) Advocate of a High Court for 10 years  
(c) Distinguished Jurist in the opinion of the President (d) Member of Parliament for at least one term  
  
Who appoints the judges of the Supreme Court of India?  
(a) Prime Minister (b) Chief Justice of India  
  
(c) President of India (d) Parliament  
  
In which year was the established convention of appointing the seniormost judge as CJI first violated, and who was  
  
appointed?  
(a) 1970 — Justice MH Beg (b) 1973 — Justice AN Ray  
(c) 1977 — Justice HR Khanna (d) 1993 — Justice JS Verma  
  
In 1977, which judge was superseded when MU Beg was appointed as Chief Justice of India?  
(a) JM Shelat (b) KS Hegde (c) AN Grover (d) HR Khanna  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 28  
  
\
=== PAGE 31 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Polity & Governance  
  
13\.  
  
16\.  
  
19\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What did the Ist Judges Case (1981) rule about the word 'Consultation' in judicial appointments?  
(a) Consultation means Concurrence and is binding on the President  
  
(b) Consultation does not mean Concurrence; it only implies exchange of views  
  
(c) Consultation must involve a collegium of 4 senior judges  
  
(d) Consultation is not required for appointment of High Court judges  
  
What landmark ruling did the Supreme Court make in the 2nd Judges Case (1993)?  
(a) Collegium system was abolished (b) NJAC was established  
(c) 'Consultation' was changed to mean 'Concurrence’ (d) President was given absolute power to appoint judges  
  
According to the 3rd Judges Case (1998), the CJI must consult a collegium of how many seniormost judges before  
making recommendations?  
(a) 2 judges (b) 3 judges (c) 4 judges (d) 5 judges  
  
The National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC) was established by which Constitutional Amendment?  
(a) 97th Constitutional Amendment (b) 98th Constitutional Amendment  
(c) 99th Constitutional Amendment (d) 100th Constitutional Amendment  
  
Why did the Supreme Court strike down the NJAC in the 4th Judges Case (2015)?  
(a) It violated the right to equality (b) It was passed without proper Parliamentary procedure  
(c) It would affect the independence of the judiciary — (d) It was against the directive principles  
  
Under Article 126, the President can appoint an Acting Chief Justice of India when the office of CJI is vacant,  
temporarily absent, or unable to perform duties. From whom is this Acting CJI appointed?  
(a) A retired Chief Justice of India (b) A Judge of the Supreme Court  
(c) A Chief Justice of a High Court (d) The Attorney General of India  
  
Under Article 127, who can appoint an Ad-hoc Judge of the Supreme Court when there is a lack of quorum?  
(a) President of India (b) Union Minister of Law and Justice  
(c) Chief Justice of India (d) Prime Minister in consultation with the CJI  
  
Who was PD Dinakaran and what was significant about his resignation in 2011?  
  
(a) He was a Supreme Court Judge who was impeached by Parliament  
  
(b) He was Chief Justice of Sikkim High Court who resigned before impeachment proceedings amid corruption  
charges  
  
(c) He was an Attorney General who resigned over a judicial controversy  
  
(d) He was a Supreme Court Judge who refused to take oath of office  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 29  
  
\
