=== PAGE 56 ===
  
Why in News?  
  
On May 1, International Labour Day was observed to honour contribution of workers across the world.  
  
International Labour Day  
  
e Also known as Workers Day or May Day.  
  
"May 2026  
  
Los TOPIC  
. “inNEWS  
  
INTERNATIONAL  
LABOUR DAY  
  
e — Takes place annually on May 1".  
  
¢ Origin can be traced back to Late 19" Century Labour Movement in  
United States.  
  
e In 1886, alarge demonstration happened in America where Labours  
demanded 8 hours of Work ona Daily Basis.  
o However, soon demonstration went out of hand, and in  
  
Chicago, a lot of people got hurt. This incident came to be  
  
knownas "Haymarket Affair".  
o Haymarket Affair Incident marked start of International  
Labour Day.  
  
¢ In 1889, Socialist Parties in Europe came together and decided to celebrate May | CONDITIONS OF WORK  
  
1 as International Labour Day.  
  
e In India, 1“ May Day was celebrated in Chennai (then Madras) in 1923 by (Regulation & Abolition)  
  
Labour Kisan Party of Hindustan.  
e Theme 2026-Ensuring Safety and Health at Work in A Changing Climate  
  
Constitutional Provisions Related to Labour  
  
e = Article 19 (1) C: Grants Citizens Right to form Associations or Unions.  
e = Article 23: Prohibits Forced Labour.  
e Article 24: Prohibits Employment of Children below age of 14 Years.  
  
International Labour Organisation  
Specialized Agency of United Nations.  
  
Dedicated to improving Labour Conditions  
and Living Standards throughout the world.  
  
1" affiliated Specialized Agency of UN in 1946.  
Awarded Nobel Prize for Peace in 1969.  
Director General: Gilbert Houngbo  
  
HQ: Geneva (Switzerland)  
  
CHART 1: TYPES OF  
LABOUR LAWS  
  
« Factories Act, 1948  
¢ The Contract Labour  
  
Act, 1970  
¢ Shops and Commercial  
Establishments Act  
  
« Shops and Commercial  
Establishments Act  
  
WAGES & REMUNERATION  
« The Minimum Wages Act, 1948  
Payment of Wages Act, 1936  
  
SOCIAL SECURITY  
  
« Employees' Provident Fund Act, 1952  
  
Name of the Code Number of amalgamated laws  
« Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923  
Wage Code 4 \* Empl S I Act, 1948  
Industrial Relation Code 3 a ae ted  
Occupational Safety. Health 13 INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  
& Working Conditions Code ¢ The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  
Social Security Code 9 ¢ Industrial Establishments  
  
Total 29 (Standing Orders) Act, 1946  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 54  
  
\
=== PAGE 57 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days  
  
Workers through Legislation or Economic Organisation.  
  
Gi fd  
  
Sey ORGANISATION  
  
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR  
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Article 39(a): Provides that State shall secure to its citizens Equal Right to an Adequate Means of Livelihood.  
Article 41: Provides that within limits of its economic capacity State shall secure for Right to Work and Education.  
  
Article 43: Orders State to secure a Living Wage, Decent Conditions of Work, Social and Cultural Opportunities to All  
  
Article 43A: Provides for Participation of Workers in Management of Industries through legislation.  
  
A specialised agency of the United  
Nations devoted to promoting social justice  
  
and internationally recognised human and labour rights  
  
Overview  
  
Establishment Headquarters  
  
Unique Feature Nobel Peace Prize SS  
  
ane Treaty of Versailles Geneva, Switzerland Tripartite 1969 Si y  
  
1946 ILO became the first Members See structure For Improving peace among classes,  
  
specialised agency associated 187 (equal voice pursuing decent work and justice for  
  
with the United Nations, after (India is a for workers, workers  
  
the demise of the League of founding 5 employers, For Providing technical assistance  
  
Nations member) governments) to other developing nations.  
Objectives Fundamental Conventions of ILO  
  
\* Promote and realize standard ¢ An integral part of the United Nations Human Rights Framework  
  
and fundamental labour rights. a  
  
Create greater opportunities  
for women and men.  
  
\-  
  
Enhance social protection.  
  
Strengthen social dialogue and tripartism.  
  
International Labour Standards  
  
Legal instruments drawn up by the ILO's cons-  
tituents (governments, employers and workers)  
& setting out basic principles and rights at work  
  
Conventions & Protocols  
Legally binding  
international treaties  
  
Recommendations  
Non-binding guidelines:  
  
ILO Declaration on Fundamental  
Principles and Rights at Work  
  
Adopted in 1998, amended in 2022  
  
Focus areas  
\* Freedom of association  
Elimination of forced labour  
Abolition of child labour  
Elimination of employment  
discrimination  
Safe & healthy working conditions  
  
.  
  
\* Conventions 1-6 are ratified by India  
  
Forced Labour Convention (No. 29)  
Abolition of Forced Labour (No. 105)  
Equal Remuneration (No. 100)  
Discrimination (No. 111)  
  
Minimum Age (No. 138)  
  
Right to Organise & Collective  
Bargaining (No. 98)  
  
Freedom of Association (No. 87)  
  
Worst Forms of Child Labour (No. 182)  
  
Key Reports  
  
World Employment and  
Social Outlook (WESO)  
  
Global Wage Report  
  
World Social  
Protection Report  
  
World Employment and  
Social Outlook for Youth  
  
World of Work Report  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@  
  
55  
  
\
=== PAGE 58 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days  
  
10\.  
  
11\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
International Labour Day is observed on which date every year?  
(a) March 8 (b) April 22 (c) May 1 (d) June 5  
  
The origin of International Labour Day can be traced back to labour movement in which country?  
(a) France (b) United Kingdom (c) United States (d) Russia  
  
In 1886, the large demonstration in America was centred around which key demand of labourers?  
(a) Minimum wage guarantee (b) Right to form trade unions  
(c) 8 hours of work on a daily basis (d) Ban on child labour in factories  
  
The incident that marked the start of International Labour Day, arising from the 1886 demonstration in Chicago, is  
known as:  
(a) The Chicago Riots (b) The Pullman Strike — (c) The Haymarket Affair (d) The Great Labour Uprising  
  
Where and by which organisation was the first May Day celebrated in India in 1923?  
(a) Mumbai (then Bombay) by the All India Trade Union Congress  
  
(b) Chennai (then Madras) by the Labour Kisan Party of Hindustan  
  
(c) Kolkata (then Calcutta) by the Indian National Congress  
  
(d) Delhi by the Communist Party of India  
  
What was the theme of International Labour Day 2024?  
  
(a) 'Decent Work and Economic Growth for All'  
  
(b) 'Ensuring Safety and Health at Work in A Changing Climate’  
(c) ‘Responsible Innovation for Inclusive Growth'  
  
(d) 'Social Justice for All Workers’  
  
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) is a specialized agency of which body?  
(a) World Trade Organisation (b) G20 (c) United Nations (d) World Bank  
  
Who is the current Director General of the International Labour Organisation?  
(a) Guy Ryder (b) Gilbert Houngbo (c) Juan Somavia (d) David Malpass  
  
Where is the Headquarters of the International Labour Organisation located?  
(a) New York, USA (b) Brussels, Belgium (c) Vienna, Austria (d) Geneva, Switzerland  
  
Which Article of the Indian Constitution grants citizens the Right to form Associations or Unions?  
(a) Article 14 (b) Article 19(1)(c) (c) Article 21 (d) Article 32  
  
Article 23 of the Indian Constitution deals with which labour-related provision?  
(a) Prohibition of employment of children below 14 years  
  
(b) Right to work and education  
  
(c) Prohibition of forced labour  
  
(d) Participation of workers in management of industries  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 56  
  
\
=== PAGE 59 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Sports, Awards & Days — Tutorial —  
  
12\.  
  
14\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Under Article 24 of the Indian Constitution, employment of children below what age is prohibited?  
(a) 12 Years (b) 14 Years (c) 16 Years (d) 18 Years  
  
Article 39(a) of the Indian Constitution provides for which right for citizens?  
(a) Right to form trade unions (b) Right to equal pay for equal work  
(c) Equal right to an adequate means of livelihood (d) Right to participate in management of industries  
  
Article 41 of the Indian Constitution directs the State to secure which rights within the limits of its economic capacity?  
(a) Right to form unions and Right to strike  
  
(b) Right to Work and Education  
  
(c) Right to a Living Wage and Decent Conditions of Work  
  
(d) Right to Maternity Benefits and Equal Pay  
  
Which Article of the Indian Constitution orders the State to secure a Living Wage, decent conditions of work and  
social and cultural opportunities to all workers?  
(a) Article 39(a) (b) Article 41 (c) Article 43 (d) Article 43A  
  
Ly  
\\- QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE  
Days and Events  
e Indian Institute of Mass Communication released a commemorative issue of Sanchar Madhyam to mark  
  
200 Years of Hindi Journalism.  
o Udant Martand was 1" Hindi Newspaper, launched in 1826 from Kolkata by Jugal Kishore Shukla.  
  
e 15 Nursing Personnel received National Florence Nightingale Awards on International Nurses Day (12  
May).  
o Instituted in 1973 by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to honour Outstanding Nursing Services.  
\= Florence Nightingale: Regarded as Founder of Modern Nursing, a British Social Reformer &  
Statistician.  
e World Lupus Day was observed on 10 May with theme “Make Lupus Visible”.  
o Lupus is a Chronic Autoimmune Disease in which Immune System attacks healthy Tissues and Organs.  
\= Primarily affects Women of Childbearing Age.  
  
e International Day for Biological Diversity observed on 22 May to promote biodiversity conservation with  
2026 theme, “Acting Locally for Global Impact”.  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 57  
  
\
