=== PAGE 60 ===
  
at p  
—O  
  
"May 2026  
  
», TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
MISCELLANEOUS  
  
INTERNATIONAL NEWS AND RELATIONS  
  
India — Vietnam Relations  
  
India and Vietnam elevated bilateral ties to enhanced Comprehensive Strategic Partnership following state visit of To Lam.  
  
Both Countries set a target of achieving USD 25 Billion bilateral trade by 2030.  
Vietnam formally joined Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative.  
  
e Vietnam is India's 4" Largest Trading Partner in ASEAN.  
  
e — Joint Vision Statement for 2030 seeks deeper Defence Cooperation and Joint Development of Advanced Defence Platforms.  
  
o India has extended a USD 500 Million Defence Line of Credit to Vietnam.  
  
o Military Exercises: VINBAX (Army), Sahyog (Coast Guard)  
  
e JREL (India) Ltd and Institute for Technology of Radioactive and Rare Elements (Vietnam) signed Strategic Rare Earths Pact  
  
to Reduce Geopolitical Dependence on Critical Mineral Supply Chains.  
  
e Archaeological Survey of India is involved in restoration work at My Son Sanctuary (UNESCO World Heritage Site)  
  
associated with ancient Champa civilization.  
  
Dear Lpt’ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic ¢  
of time, effort, energy and money  
be fair if someone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
/ putting in lot  
  
ssful and it woul  
  
And they will create competition for-you without being the part of Law  
prep. To prevent this unfair activity, be vigilant and inform us if you find  
  
anybody ng (in any form) it aching from it.  
  
ge of Law Prep ma  
  
rial is illegal and  
  
sonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
  
suggestions/feedb: mplaints/compliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
58  
  
\
=== PAGE 61 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
ASEAN  
  
Association of Southeast Asian Nations  
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
LAW PREP  
  
—Tutorial—  
  
Members (11) Core Aims  
eg Indonesia Msq\_ Brunei (1984) \* Accelerate economic and  
social progress.  
  
Promote regional peace  
and stability.  
  
Foster collaboration  
across fields.  
Cooperate with global  
organizations.  
  
Go Laos (1997)  
| ate | Cambodia (1999)  
  
Timor-Leste (2025)  
  
Singapore  
  
eer  
| Thailand  
\=  
  
Formation Key Agreements and Fourms  
  
8\*August 1967  
  
East Asia  
Summit (EAS)  
Created in 2005,  
a leaders-level  
forum witha  
varied agenda.  
  
ASEAN Free Trade  
Area (AFTA)  
Established in  
1992 to create a  
single market.  
  
ASEAN Regional  
Forum (ARF)  
Established in  
  
1994 for political  
and security  
  
dialogue  
  
\* Bangkok, Thailand  
  
Principles  
  
1\. Non-interference in  
internal affairs of  
member states.  
  
2\. Consensual  
decision- making.  
  
3\. Maintaining  
"centrality" in  
regional matters.  
  
ASEAN Economic  
Community (AEC)  
Formed in 2015 to facilitate  
the free flow of goods,  
services, investments,  
capital, and labor.  
  
Regional Comprehensive  
Economic Partnership  
(RCEP):  
Concluded in 2019,  
covering 30% of the  
world's population.  
  
Key Challenges  
  
\* Geopolitical Pressures: Balancing influence between China and the U.S.  
  
\* South China Sea Disputes: Inability to provide a coordinated response to  
China's territorial claims.  
  
\+ Myanmar Crisis: Criticism for not isolating the military junta in Myanmar.  
  
\+ Economic Ties: China as the largest trading partner, while the U.S. provides  
strategic support.  
  
Indian-ASEAN Relations Thailand  
1 rr Current Historical Strategic |  
importance =— Cooperation Context Goals Laos  
  
ASEAN is central Emphasis on India-ASEAN summits Promote a free,  
  
to India's Act political, economic, began in 2002; the open, inclusive,  
East Policyand and security Act East Policy was peaceful, and  
Indo-Pacific cooperation. announced in 2014. prosperous Indo  
vision. -Pacific region. \_\_ |  
  
Myanmar  
Cambodia  
  
Recent Developments and Statements  
  
\+ India's Commitment: PM of India at the 20th  
ASEAN-India Summit emphasized ASEAN's  
centrality to India's Act East Policy and Indo-Pacific  
vision.  
  
\* Strategic Engagement: Continuous expansion of  
political, economic, and security cooperation with  
ASEAN.  
  
Malaysia\!  
Singapore —  
  
HEADQUARTERS  
  
Jakarta, Indonesia  
  
Institutional Mechanism  
  
Qe Charter  
  
Effective Date: 15 December  
2008\.  
  
Ratification: Fully ratified by all  
10 Member States.  
  
Legal Status: Legally binding  
agreement, registered with the  
UN Secretariat.  
  
New Framework: Establishes  
new organs to enhance  
community-building.  
  
Q vers sum  
  
It meets annually to discuss  
regional issues and set policy  
directions.  
  
® ASEAN Coordinating Council  
  
It oversees the implementation  
of ASEAN agreements and  
decisions.  
  
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)  
  
It is a platform for dialogue and  
cooperation on political and  
security issues among ASEAN  
member countries and their  
partners.  
  
05 } ASEAN Secretariat  
  
It supports and facilitates  
ASEAN's activities and initiatives.  
  
06\) Decision Making  
  
It is done through consultation  
and consensus.  
  
Fel  
  
Timor-Leste  
  
\~  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@  
  
59  
  
\
=== PAGE 62 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Thucydides Trap  
Xi Jinping invoked “Thucydides Trap” Concept during talks with Donald Trump to warn against Escalating China— United States  
Strategic Rivalry.  
e Idea originates from writings of Thucydides. :  
o Analysed Peloponnesian War fought between Athens Strategic Significance  
(Emerging Power) and Sparta (Dominant Established Relevance in International Relations: Powe  
  
Transitions in International System, Rivalries  
among Major Powers, Security Dilemmas an  
Arms Competition.  
  
Power).  
  
o Core Argument: Thucydides argued that growth of Athenian  
  
Power and fear it generated in Sparta made conflict © Concerns in Modern Context: Trade Tensions  
  
increasingly inevitable. Military Competition, Technological Rivalry  
  
e Refers to Heightened Risk of Conflict that emerges when a Rising and Maritime Disputes between Major Globa  
Powers.  
  
Power challenges an Established Dominant Power.  
  
e Resulting Fear, Mistrust and Strategic Competition may increase  
likelihood of Confrontation or War.  
  
¢ Concept is often used in context of China as Rising Power and United States as Existing Global Power.  
  
Criticism of Concept  
Determinism Debate: Some scholars argue that theory may Oversimplify International Politics by implying  
that Conflict becomes Unavoidable during Power Transitions.  
Importance of Diplomacy: Critics highlight that Economic Interdependence, International Institutions and  
Diplomatic Engagement can help prevent escalation between Rival Powers.  
  
Ebola Outbreak in DR Congo  
  
WHO declared Ebola outbreak in Democratic Republic of Congoa Public |  
Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), linked to PHEIC  
Bundibugyo Strain in Ituri region. :  
  
\= Under International Health |  
Regulations 2005, PHEIC is defined as :  
a Public Health Risk of International  
Disease Spread requiring Coordinated  
  
e — Type: Zoonotic Disease  
e Formerly known as Ebola Haemorrhagic Fever.  
  
Globa Response.  
2" Highest Global Health Alert after  
  
e Severe and Fatal Viral Disease affecting Humans and Primates.  
  
e 1" identified in 1976 during Two Simultaneous Outbreaks; one in  
Yambuku (DRC) near Ebola River and other in Nzara (South Sudan).  
  
e Caused By: Orthoebolavirus Genus under Filoviridae Family.  
  
e Six Species: Bombali, Bundibugyo, Zaire (Deadliest), Reston, Sudan, Tai Forest.  
  
POLITY AND GOVERNANCE  
  
Mission for Cotton Productivity’  
Union Cabinet approved Mission for Cotton Productivity (2026 —27 to 2030-31), announced in Union Budget 2025 — 26.  
  
e Popularly called Kapas Kanti.  
  
e — Aligns with India's 5F Vision (Farm — Fibre — Factory \> Fashion \> Foreign)  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 60  
  
\
=== PAGE 63 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous \[— Tutorial\]  
  
¢ Objective: Make India Self — Sufficient in Cotton, Enhance Global i Cotton and its Cultivation in India  
Competitiveness of India's Textile Sector, Improve Productivity, be Popularly called “White Gold”  
Quality and Sustainability by 2030-31. © World's 2" Largest Pro ducer an ds  
  
e Implementing Ministries: Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Consumer of Cotton after China, with  
Welfare & Ministry of Textiles Largest Cultivation Area globally.  
  
e Largest Cotton — producing States:  
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Telangana, |  
Karnataka. :  
  
o Supported by Indian Council of Agricultural Research and  
  
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.  
  
e Coverage: Focus on 140 Districts across 14 major Cotton — growing  
  
States.  
5F Vision of the Textile Sector  
  
& Ep Pas Ey Ge  
  
The initial stage The transformation Manufacturing and Designing and Exporting and global  
involves agriculture of raw materials into production in creating fashionable distribution of  
and raw material fibers. factories. E.g. items. textiles.  
production. weaving  
  
Bt Cotton  
  
ie Genetically Modified (GM) Cotton.  
e Developed by incorporating a Gene from bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) making it resistant against pests  
  
like Bollworm.  
e¢ Only GM Crop approved by Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC) of Ministry of Environment,  
Forest and Climate Change for Commercial Cultivation.  
CSIR — National Botanical Research Institute has developed World's I" Pink Bollworm— Resistant GM Cotton  
  
India is the only country which Major 9 cotton growing states  
grows all four species of cotton divided according to Agro-Ecological  
zones  
  
G. Arboreum and G. Barbadense  
  
G. Herbaceum (Egyptian cotton)  
(Asian cotton)  
. = Northern Zone  
G.Hirsutum = Central Zone  
(American Upland cotton) = Southern Zone  
  
a |  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 61  
  
y  
  
\
=== PAGE 64 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Change in Citizenship Rules 2026  
  
Centre notified draft Citizenship Rules Amendments imposing stricter declaration and surrender norms for applicants from  
  
Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh.  
  
e Schedule 1C Amendment: Changes inserted in Schedule IC of  
  
iti i Constitutional Fact:  
Citizenship Rules. onstitutional Facts  
  
Covered under Part II (Articles 5—11).  
  
Citizenship = Union List Subject  
(Parliament Exclusive Power).  
  
India does NOT allow Dual Citizenship.  
o Acquisition of Foreign Citizenship  
  
o Applies specifically to applicants from Pakistan, Afghanistan,  
  
Bangladesh.  
  
o Covers Non — Muslim Communities: Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists,  
  
Jains, Parsis, Christians.  
  
leads to Loss of Indian Citizenship  
  
e Mandatory Declaration Requirement: Applicants must declare whether  
(Automatic Termination)  
  
they possess a Valid or Expired Passport from Pakistan, Afghanistan and  
Bangladesh.  
o They mustalso provide full passport details for verification.  
  
e — Passport Surrender Rule: If Citizenship is granted Foreign Passport must be surrendered within 15 days submission to Senior  
Superintendent of Post.  
  
e Introduced electronic— Overseas Citizen of India (e— OCI) Cards alongside Physical OCI Cards.  
  
o Government will maintain a Centralised Electronic Database of OCI Holders.  
  
e¢ = Minor Children holding an Indian Passport cannot simultaneously possess passports of Another Country.  
  
Citizenship Act, 1955  
©@ =\~ Modes of Acquisition: Birth, Descent, Registration, Naturalisation, Incorporation of Territory  
  
.@ = Termination/Loss of Citizenship  
  
: o Renunciation: Voluntary Surrender of Indian Citizenship  
  
0 Termination: Automatic Loss if foreign citizenship is acquired. :  
o Deprivation: Government Action can be imposed if Citizenship obtained Fraudulently | Disloyalty to  
  
Constitution | Wartime Unlawful Communication / Trade | Jail Term (22 Years within 5 Years of  
Naturalisation) | Long Residence Abroad (=7 years) :  
  
Privilege Notice  
  
Privilege Notice moved in Rajya Sabha against Union Education Minister over alleged Breach of Parliamentary Dignity.  
e Formal Mechanism used by MPs to allege Breach of Parliamentary Privilege or Contempt of the House by Ministers,  
Members of Parliament and External Individuals or Institutions  
e Aim: To protect Dignity, Authority and Independence of Parliament.  
e Derived from Article 105 of the Constitution.  
o Provides MPs Freedom of Speech in Parliament, Immunity from Legal Proceedings for Legislative Actions and  
Protection of Institutional Dignity.  
e Procedure of Privilege Motion: MP submits notice under Lok Sabha Rule 222 and Rajya Sabha Rule 187.  
o Speaker/Chairman's Role: Reviews Notice and decides whether to allow discussion in House or refer it to Privileges  
Committee.  
o Final decision taken by Lok Sabha/ Rajya Sabha.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 62  
  
\
=== PAGE 65 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Privileges Committee Composition  
o Lok Sabha: 15 Members (Nominated by Speaker)  
\= Chairperson appointed by Speaker  
o Rajya Sabha: 10 Members (Nominated by Chairman)  
\= Chaired by Deputy Chairman  
  
Prime Minister's Employment Generation Programme  
  
Prime Minister's Employment Generation Programme achieved 100% Budget Utilisation.  
e Launched in 2008.  
o Merged Prime Minister's Rojgar Yojana and Rural Employment Generation Programme.  
e Nature: Central Sector Credit— linked Subsidy Scheme  
e Aim: Promoting Self— Employment through establishment of Micro— Enterprises.  
e¢ Covers Both Rural Areas and Urban Areas  
  
e — Eligibility Criteria: Any Individual aged 18 Years or Above can apply.  
  
o =©Minimum Qualification of Class 8 pass required for Manufacturing Projects above =10 Lakh and Service projects above  
%5 Lakh.  
  
e Administered By: Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
  
e Implemented By: Khadi and Village Industries Commission  
  
Fair and Remunerative Price  
  
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs increased Fair and Remunerative Price of Sugarcane by 10 per quintal for 2026 — 27  
Sugar Season.  
  
e Minimum Legally Guaranteed Price that Sugar Mills must pay Sugarcane Farmers for their produce across India.  
  
e Ensures Assured Returns to Sugarcane Farmers, Protection against Price Exploitation by Mills and Stability in Sugarcane  
Cultivation.  
  
e Fixed under Sugarcane (Control) Order 1966 and Issued under Essential Commodities Act 1955.  
e Recommended By: Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices  
  
e Final Approval: Cabinet Committee on Economic A ffairs  
  
Feature FRP MSP  
Applicable Crop Sugarcane Only 22 Major Crops  
Legal Status Legally Binding on Mills Not Legally Enforceable on Private Buyers  
Fixing Authority CCEA (on CACP advice) Cabinet (on CACP advice)  
Model Code of Conduct  
  
A Petition in Supreme Court of India alleged that PM Modi's National Broadcast during elections violated Model Code of  
Conduct and Representation of People Act 1951.  
  
e Legal Status: Non- Statutory  
e Set of Guidelines issued by Election Commission of India to regulate Political Parties, Candidates and Government in Power.  
  
e Purpose: Ensure Free, Fair and Level—playing Field Elections.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 63  
  
\
=== PAGE 66 ===
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Core Idea: No Unfair Advantage to Ruling Party.  
  
Key Judgment  
Mohinder Singh Gill vs Chief Election  
Commissioner (1978) — Article 324 =  
“Reservoir of Power” for ECI.  
  
e Key Provisions: No Combining Official Visits + Election  
Campaigning.  
  
o NoUse ofGovernment Machinery for Campaign.  
  
o =NoMisuse of Publicly Funded Media. Harbans Singh Jalal vs Union of India  
‘One Case One Data' and 'Su Sahay' (1997) — MCC starts from Date of  
Supreme Court of India launched 2 Digital Unitiatives — 'One Case One Election Schedule announcement.  
  
Data’ and'Su Sahay’.  
e¢ One Case One Data: Digital Integration Initiative aimed at creating a Unified Judicial Data Ecosystem across India.  
© Objective: To integrate Case — related Data from Supreme Court, High Courts, District Courts and Taluka Courts into a  
Single Interconnected Digital Platform.  
e SuSahay: AI- enabled Chatbot integrated with Supreme Court website.  
o Purpose: To assist Litigants and Citizens in accessing Court—related Services and Procedural Information more easily.  
  
o Developed By: National Informatics Centre in collaboration with Supreme Court Registry.  
  
ECONOMICS  
  
RBI's Economic Capital Framework  
  
RBI Board approved record 2.86 Lakh Crore Surplus Transfer (Highest Ever) to Central  
  
Government for FY 2025-26. Surplus  
\_ Net Income derived from |  
  
RBI Surplus calculated under Revised Framework, maintaining Contingent Risk Buffer at  
  
4.5% —7.5% of Balance Sheet. Total Income minus Total  
  
Expenditure.  
  
e Introduced in 2019 following Bimal Jalan Committee Recommendations.  
e Economic Capital Framework governs:  
o HowRBI provisions for Financial Risks?  
  
o Howittransfers Surplus/Dividends to Government of India?  
  
Key Features of ECF  
Contingency Risk Buffer A Financial Safety Buffer to guard against Unforeseen Risks.  
Surplus Transfer Mechanism Surplus is Transferred to Gol only after CRB Targets are Met.  
Review Cycle To Be Reviewed Every 5 Years (2025 Review is 1 Such Exercise).  
  
Surplus Transfer and ECF  
  
e Every year, RBI pays a Dividend to Government to help with :  
Government's Finances from its Surplus Profit. ; How RBI earn its Profit?  
  
o Section 47 of RBI Act 1934 mandates that Any Profits made by © Open Market Operations, wherein a  
  
RBI from its operations be sent to Centre. Central Bank Purchases or Sells Bonds.  
  
: : . e Interest Received from Bonds.  
e Economic Capital Framework provides a Methodology for  
  
e Returns from its Foreign Currency Assets.  
  
determining Appropriate Level of Risk Provisions and Profit  
Distribution to be made under Section 47 of RBI Act 1934.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 64  
  
\
=== PAGE 67 ===
  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
o RBI constituted a Committee headed by Bimal Jalan to  
review 2015—16 ECF in2018. Significance of Record RBI Surplus Transfer  
  
\= RBlalso has to maintain a CRB within a range of 6.5% to Increased Capital Expenditure  
  
5.5% of RBI's Balance Sheet.  
o RBI Board's Technical Committee, led by YH Malegam in  
  
Reduced Borrowing and Fiscal Consolidation  
  
Boost to Bond Markets  
  
2013, recommended Higher Transfer of Reserves and Meeting Revenue Shortfall  
  
Surplus to Government, which typically Averages around Covering Disinvestment Target  
  
0.5% of Gross Domestic Product.  
  
Contingency Risk Buffer  
  
Fund kept for Unforeseen Contingencies like Depreciation of Securities Values, Risks from Monetary Rate Policy, etc. |  
  
Forms Core of RBI's Enterprise-Wide Risk Management Framework Introduced in 2012.  
RBI Raises Contingent Risk Buffer to 7.5% for Financial Year 2024-25.  
  
India — New Zealand Free Trade Agreement  
  
India and New Zealand signed India— New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, boosting engagement with Developed Economies.  
  
Free Trade Agreement: A Pact between Countries to Reduce or Eliminate Customs Duties and Liberalise Trade in Services  
ensures Investment Protection and Safeguard Intellectual Property Rights.  
  
New Zealand is India's 2" Largest Trading Partner in Oceania.  
e¢ = Market Access: 100% Duty Elimination on Indian Exports to New Zealand.  
  
o India provides access to 70.03% Tariff Lines, retaining 29.97% under Exclusion.  
e Investment Commitments: New Zealand to invest USD 20 Billion over 15 Years.  
  
e Organic and Agricultural Cooperation: Mutual Recognition of Organic Certification Standards.  
  
Elen  
  
o Sensitive Sectors (e.g., dairy, agriculture) kept under Exclusion to protect Domestic Producers.  
  
e MENTreatment: Most— Favoured Nation treatment extended in 139 Sectors.  
  
SAARC Currency Swap Framework  
  
India approved 1° 230 Billion withdrawal by Maldives under SAARC Currency Swap Framework.  
  
Currency Swap Framework  
© Bilateral Arrangement between Central Banks.  
e Exchange of Domestic Currencies at a Predetermined Rate and Reversal at a Future Date at Same Rate.  
¢ Objective: Provides Short — Term Liquidity Support.  
  
e Launched by RBI in 2012.  
  
Significance  
Strengthens Regional Financial Stability.  
  
e Purpose: Support SAARC Nations during BoP Crises.  
  
Reduces Dependence on External Borrowing. :  
Promotes Indian Rupee Internationalisation.  
Reinforces Neighbourhood First Policy.  
  
e Revised Framework (2024-2027): 2250 Billion INR Swap  
Window & Separate $2 Billion USD — Euro Facility.  
  
e Tenure: 3 Months (extendable twice)  
  
Index of Eight Core Industries  
  
Index of Eight Core Industries grew 1.7% in Apr 2026, signalling Moderate Expansion across Key Industrial Sectors.  
  
e Serves as a Leading Indicator of Overall Industrial Activity.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 65  
  
\
=== PAGE 68 ===
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Miscellaneous — Tutorial =  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Monthly Production Index that tracks performance of India's Most Critical Infrastructure and Industrial Sectors.  
Eight Core Industries: Coal, Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Refinery Products, Fertilisers, Steel, Cement, Electricity  
Base Year: 2011-12  
  
Aligned with Index of Industrial Production  
  
Released By: Office of Economic Adviser  
  
Importance in Economy  
  
Proxy for Industrial Growth: These industries collectively have a strong influence on Manufacturing, :  
Infrastructure Development and Energy Availability.  
  
Weight in IIP: Core Industries account for 40.27% Weight in Index of Industrial Production.  
  
Early Economic Indicator: Changes in ICI ofien signal shifts in GDP Momentum, Industrial Slowdown or  
Recovery, Infrastructure Demand Cycles  
  
Purchasing Managers' Index  
  
India's Manufacturing PMI rises to 54.7 in April 2026, signalling continued expansion despite Slower Growth Momentum,  
  
though it marked 2" Slowest Pace of improvement in nearly four years.  
  
Lebanon accused Israel of 'Ecocide' over alleged Environmental,  
Destruction during Military Operations. Status of Ecocide in India  
  
Economic Indicator that measures Business Activity and Overall Economic Health in Manufacturing or Services Sector.  
Acts as an Early Indicator of Economic Trends before Official Industrial Data is released.  
  
Helps Investors, Businesses and Policymakers assess Demand Conditions, Production Trends, Inflationary Pressures,  
Employment Outlook, Supply — Chain Efficiency.  
  
Components of PMI: New Orders, Output, Employment, Suppliers’ Delivery Times Stock of Items Purchased  
Interpretation of PMI  
  
o PMI\>50— Expansion/Growth in Economic Activity  
  
o =PMI=50—NoChange  
  
o PMI\<50—Contraction/Decline in Activity  
  
Compiled By: S\&P Global  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
Ecocide  
  
India has not signed Rome Statute, hence :  
not bound by ICC Jurisdiction.  
  
In MK Ranjitsinh (2024): SC recognised  
Right against Adverse Climate Change  
under Articles 14 & 21.  
  
Refers to Unlawful or Reckless Acts committed with knowledge that  
they are likely to cause Severe, Widespread or Long — term  
  
Environmental Damage.  
  
Currently Not Recognised under Rome Statute of International  
Criminal Court.  
  
o Recognised International Crimes: Genocide, Crimes Against Humanity, War Crimes, Crime of Aggression.  
National Recognition: Codified in \~15 Countries, including Vietnam (1" to codify), France, Belgium, Russia, Ukraine.  
  
Illustrative Examples of Ecocide: Use of Agent Orange during Vietnam War, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, Large - scale  
Amazon Deforestation  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 66  
  
\
