=== PAGE 77 ===
  
{May 2026  
  
TOPIC  
. “in NEWS  
  
Sy eR  
  
INTERNATIONAL NEWS  
SEEDS Initiative  
  
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar inaugurated India — supported projects in Trinidad and Tobago under SEEDS initiative.  
e SEEDS stands for Supply of Equipment for Efficient Development of SMEs.  
  
e Indian Developmental Cooperation Initiative aimed at supporting Small and Medium Enterprises in Countries of Global  
South.  
  
e Implemented By: Ministry of External Affairs  
  
POLITY AND GOVERNANCE  
  
National AI Skilling Programme for Creative Sector  
  
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in collaboration with Indian Institute of Creative Technologies, launched a National  
AI Skilling Initiative for Creative Sector.  
  
e¢ Objective: To build Industry — Ready AI Capabilities in India's Creative Industries.  
  
e Aim: To strengthen India's Growing Creative Economy and Digital Content Ecosystem.  
e Target Sectors: Media, Animation, Gaming, Digital Storytelling, Content Creation  
  
e Developed in partnership with Google and YouTube.  
  
e Implementing Agency: Indian Institute of Creative Technologies  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
India's 1° Human — Elephant Conflict Research Centre’  
  
Jharkhand is set to establish India's 1“ dedicated Human — Elephant Conflict Research Centre at Palamu Tiger Reserve.  
e Project Elephant (1992): Launched by Government of India to protect Elephants, conserve Habitats and Corridors.  
e Haathi Mere Saathi Campaign: Promote Coexistence between Humans and Elephants.  
  
o Reduce Retaliatory Violence through Public Awareness, Community Sensitisation, Conservation Education.  
  
e Project RE — HAB (Reducing Elephant — Human Attacks using Bees) implemented by Khadi and Village Industries  
Commission.  
  
Mission Mausam  
  
Ministry of Earth Sciences inaugurated India's 1“ Urban Testbed and Aerosol Observatory by Indian Institute of Tropical  
Meteorology in Chennai under Mission Mausam.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Followusnow 8@O@ 75  
  
\
=== PAGE 78 ===
  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Ailet Corner — Tutorial =  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
It is an Integrated Atmospheric Monitoring System designed for Real — Time Urban Weather Observation, Air Quality  
Monitoring, Aerosol Tracking and Climate—related Research.  
  
e Flagship Initiative of Ministry of Earth Sciences.  
e = Objective: To make India “Weather — Ready” and “Climate — Smart”.  
  
e Focus Areas: Improved Weather Forecasting, Advanced Climate Modelling, Early Warning Systems, Disaster Risk  
Reduction, Urban Climate Resilience  
  
DEFENCE  
  
Kalam & Kavach 3.0  
3” edition of Kalam & Kavach 3.0 Defence Conference was held in New Delhi.  
  
e Serves as a High — level Platform for deliberations on India's Defence Transformation, Military Modernisation and  
Future Preparedness.  
  
e = Theme: “Taking JAI Forward With P?”  
o JAI: Jointness, Aatmanirbharta, Innovation  
oP: Indigenisation, International Collaboration  
e Organised By: Ministry of Defence  
Defence Research and Development Organisation & Indian Air Force successfully conducted maiden flight trial of TARA  
Weapon System.  
  
e TARA stands for Tactical Advanced Range Augmentation.  
e India's 1“ Indigenous Glide Weapon System.  
  
e Modular Range — Extension Kit that can be attached to an Existing Unguided Warhead to convert it into a Precision —  
Guided Weapon.  
  
SUMMITS, REP 5 AND INDICES  
Article 24 of ILO  
  
Tea Plantation Workers in West Bengal invoked Article 24 of Constitution of International Labour Organization alleging Labour  
  
Rights Violations in Tea Estates.  
Tea Act 1953 established Tea Board to regulate Cultivation, Production, Sale and Export of Indian Tea.  
  
e Acts as an International Accountability Mechanism for Labour Rights.  
  
e Formal Mechanism through which Industrial Associations of Workers or Employers' Organisations can file a Complaint  
against a Member Country for failing to implementa Ratified ILO Convention.  
  
European Central Bank  
  
Reserve Bank of India and European Central Bank signed revised MoU to enhance cooperation in Banking Supervision and  
Financial Regulation.  
  
e Central Bank of Eurozone.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 76  
  
\
=== PAGE 79 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs May 2026\_Ailet Corner  
  
o Eurozone: Group of European Union Countries that use Euro as their Official Currency.  
\= Consists of 21 Member Countries using Euro Currency.  
\= Recent Additions: Croatia (2023) and Bulgaria (2026).  
e Established in 1998 under Maastricht Treaty.  
¢ Collectively owned by National Central Banks of All27 EU Member States.  
e =HQ: Frankfurt  
  
Border Roads Organisation\]  
BRO celebrated 66" Raising Day of Project Deepak (1961 | Western Himalayas).  
  
e Established: 1960  
  
e India's Premier Agency for Border Infrastructure.  
  
e \~=Works in High—Altitude, Remote and Strategically Sensitive Areas.  
e DG: Raghu Srinivasan  
  
e HQ:New Delhi  
  
National Crime Records Bureau  
  
National Crime Records Bureau released Crime in India 2024 report, 1“ edition to include offences registered under Bharatiya  
Nyaya Sanhita alongside IPC.  
  
e Established in 1986.  
e Based on recommendations of Tandon Committee and National Police Commission.  
e Acts as India's Central Repository of Crime and Criminal Data.  
  
e Functions under Ministry of Home A ffairs.  
  
PERSON IN NEWS  
  
Veera Pasi  
  
Statue of Veera Pasi unveiled in Raebareli, reviving recognition of 1857 Revolt's Regional Resistance Heroes.  
.© Warrior from Pasi Community of Uttar Pradesh.  
e — Served as a commander under Rana Beni Madhav Baksh Singh.  
  
e Remembered asa Dalit Freedom Fighter who participated in Revolt of 1857 against British Colonial Rule.  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 77  
  
\
