\=== PAGE 1 ===  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
MONTHLY GK MAGAZINE FOR LAW ENTRANCES BY LAW PREP TUTORIAL  
  
wy  
A She  
  
Le hmm a  
  
Bile  
  
A GAME CHANGER FOR TRADE?  
  
\=== PAGE 2 ===  
CLAT 2026  
  
‘ i  
2-4 SCAN QRTO  
PM REGISTER NOW  
  
MODE  
ONLINE & OFFLINE  
  
\=== PAGE 3 ===  
IMPORTANT TOPICS  
JANUARY - 2026  
  
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND NEWS  
  
1\. Us Strike on Venezuela occ ecceescseeseseececscscssacseeeceeeeescsnesesseeeseeeeeeseeeesesaeeeeseeea 03  
2\. Strategic Importance of Greenland... cece ceseeeeeeeeeeeesesesceeseeeeteeesseesseseseneeeseeeeeeeeees 10  
3\. US Initiates Formation of 'Board of Peace’ for Gaza oe. ececeeeeseeseeeeeeeeceeeeeteeeeeeeeees 15  
4\. Geopolitical Battle over Diego Garcia... ee eeeeeeeeeseseseseeeeeeeeeesseesseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 23  
5\. UAE — Saudi Rift in Yernen oo... ee ceesescseececseeeeeeececscsceeaeseessnessesseeesaeseeeeeeeeees 28  
  
NATIONAL NEWS AND ISSUES  
  
CONTENTS  
  
77" Republic Day 2026 ...cecscsssssessssesssssessssessssecssssesssecssssessssesssseesssessssscssssecssesssseseasecessseess 36  
  
7\. UGC (Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions) Regulations, 2026............ 41  
POLITY AND GOVERNANCE  
  
8\. 10 Years of Startup India Initiative... eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeseseeeeseeeeesceeesaseeeeeeeees 46  
ECONOMICS  
  
9\. India — European Union free Trade Agreement..........cceeecceceeeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeseseeeasseeseeneeees 50  
  
REPORTS, SUMMITS, INDICES  
  
10\. China's Population Declines for Fourth Consecutive Yeat........c.ccccseeseeeeeeeeeseeeeeee 58  
  
ENVIRONMENT & BIODIVERSITY  
  
11\. UN High Seas Treaty Enters into Force oo... cece eeseeseceeeeeseeeeeecseseseeeeetsneeesesaeeeeeeeee 63  
SPACE  
  
13\. PSLV — C62 Mission Failure... ecceeseeseeeeeecscsessececeeseeeeeseeeesssseeeseseeeesneeesesaeeeeeeee 69  
SPORTS  
  
14\. National Sports Governance ACt oe cceccceccseeseeeeeseseseessesceeeeeseseeeesssseecseeeeetsneeesesaeeeeeeees 74  
  
15\. Miscellaneous .......c.cccceccececesceesessescseecsescscsescsesseeeeescscseesseseeeseeseseeeesssseecseeeeessneeesesaseseeeeee 79  
  
16\. ADLET Commer ....cecccecccecccccceeeseesesceecscsceescseeseeesecscsnesscsessseseeeeseesesasseecseeeeessneeesesaseseeeee 90  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar JAIPUR- 302015 (M) 72400 60099  
  
©Law Prep Tutorial  
  
All rights reserved.  
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including  
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system. Any unauthorised use of reproduction of these  
materials shall attract all applicable civil and criminal law remedies.  
  
\=== PAGE 4 ===  
Important Note for  
the Readers  
  
How to use the magazine  
  
The magazine consists of topics that hold relevance and importance in relation to CLAT.  
  
Each topic has following parts:  
  
1,  
  
News: This section ensures that the readers know what part of the topic has made it  
  
to the headlines ofa newspaper  
  
Cliffs Notes : This section helps the reader to know the context of the topic.  
Explanation that will help the reader understand about the topic is the motive of this  
section of the magazine. Before cramming the facts and details about the topic it is  
  
essential that you understand the topic. A little detail has never hurt anybody.  
  
Skill up : This section contains those topics which are related to the main topic  
discussed throughout the page. A little information on the periphery helps you  
answer those questions that are not part of the daily news but have crawled into the  
exam paper to fetch you another mark. Topics that are on the side of the main news  
have often helped in gaining that last mark which eventually puts you into the final  
  
selection list ofthe CLAT.  
  
Practice Questions: This section has a set of questions to help you gauge your  
understanding of the topic. You should try and solve the questions once you have  
thoroughly done the topic. On some days, start with the questions to test yourself for  
that one situation in the CLAT when you know nothing about the topic, but you will  
have to guess the answers. On a side note, some questions might come across to you  
  
as a surprise but then when has the CLAT main exam not thrown us off our seats\!  
  
Happy Learning\!  
  
\=== PAGE 5 ===  
\=, TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
US STRIKE  
ON VENEZUELA  
  
Why in News?  
US Forces capture Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro in Military Strike (Operation Absolute Resolve) on Caracas,  
Miranda, Aragua, La Guaira.  
United States has justified its Military Action against Venezuela and President Nicolas Maduro by citing concerns related  
to Illegal Migration, Narcotics Trafficking and Alleged Narco — Terrorism, though these claims are strongly contested by  
  
Venezuela.  
  
DOES A “LAW ENFORCEMENT” OBJECTIVE Justiry  
THE USE oF MILITARY FORCE on A SOVEREIGN TERRITORY?  
  
—— ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR ARGUMENTS AGAINST  
  
\=\> Functional Equivalence to an “Armed Attack”:  
» Fentanyl & Narco-Gangs cause mass American deaths.  
\=\> Law of the Jungle Concerns:  
  
\= “Unwilling or Unable” Doctrine:  
\+ \> Crime as Excuse to Violate Borders.  
  
» Venezuela can’t or won't stop the cartel  
  
\= Narco-Te m as Self-Defens  
\> Framed as an At 51 Threat  
  
/@ Ker-Frisbie' Doc  
  
\- © OOG Se Gh)  
GLOBAL POLICEMAN OR DANGEROUS PRECEDENT ?  
  
i  
  
Why Did the United States Attack Venezuela?  
  
¢ Migration Crisis Narrative: Former US President Donald Trump linked Venezuela's Political and Economic Collapse to  
  
rising Illegal Migration at US Southern Border.  
lion Venezuelans have fled Hyperinflation, Economic Breakdown and Political  
  
o Since 2013, nearly 8 mi  
Repression—mainly to Latin American Countries.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 03  
  
\=== PAGE 6 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
o Trump accused Maduro Government of Deliberately  
Releasing Prisoners and Asylum Inmates to migrate toward \_\_,  
the US. i°  
  
e Drugs and 'Narco-Terrorism' Allegations: US claims Venezuela  
is a Major Transit Hub for Cocaine, contributing to broader Drug  
and Fentany\! Crisis in the US.  
  
o Washington designated Tren de Aragua and Cartel de los  
  
Soles as Foreign Terrorist Organisations.  
  
o. Trump further alleged that Cartel de los Soles operates under  
leadership of President Maduro, framing issue as State —  
sponsored Narco — Terrorism.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Venezuela's Response  
Caracas has rejected All Allegations, }  
  
arguing that U.S. is Weaponizing Migration ;  
and Drug Enforcement Narratives to Justify  
Regime Change. i  
o Venezuela maintains that Intervention  
reflects Geopolitical Interests rather than i  
Genuine Concern over Migration or  
Narcotics Control. i  
  
Understanding Venezuelan Crisis  
  
e Venezuela has been facing a Deep Political and Economic  
Collapse for several years.  
  
o Hyperinflation, Prolonged Power Outages, Food  
  
Shortages and Breakdown of Healthcare Services have  
  
led to Severe Humanitarian Distress.  
  
North Pacific  
  
North Atlantic  
; Ocean  
Se  
  
Caribbean Sea re Venezuela  
  
Ocean  
  
e Crisis escalated when Juan Guaidé, Head of National  
Assembly, declared himself Acting President, citing  
provisions of Venezuelan Constitution (Articles 233 and  
333).  
  
o His claim directly challenged President Nicolas  
Maduro, who had been sworn in for a Controversial  
  
Second Term in January 2019.  
  
South Pacific  
Controversy Around Maduro's Presidency Ocean  
  
e Economic Decline: Under Maduro's Leadership,  
Venezuela's Economy suffered a Drastic Contraction,  
  
largely blamed on Corruption, Poor Governance and  
  
South Atlantic  
Ocean  
  
Overdependence on Oil.  
  
e Disputed Elections: 2018 Presidential Elections were widely  
criticized as Unfair and Non-Transparent, with Opposition \~ : e  
Leaders Barred, Imprisoned or Exiled.  
o Opposition-controlled National Assembly rejected  
Legitimacy of Election Results, calling Maduro a “Usurper”.  
  
e Guaido's Declaration as Interim President gained International  
Recognition from several Western Countries, while Nations like  
Russia and China continued supporting Maduro.  
  
Venezuela  
  
Location: On Northern Coast of South :  
America :  
  
o Bordered by Colombia, Brazil, Guyana  
and Atlantic Ocean. i  
  
President: Delcy Rodriguez (Acting)  
  
o Nicolas Maduro (De Jure)  
  
Capital: Caracus  
  
Official Language: Spanish  
  
Currency: Venezuelan Bolivar  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 04  
  
\=== PAGE 7 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
U.S. Role in Crisis  
  
ie Soon after Guaido's Self— Declaration, U.S. President Donald Trump officially recognized him as Venezuela's  
: Legitimate Leader. H  
  
¢ Inretaliation, Maduro severed Diplomatic Ties with U.S. and expelled American Diplomats.  
  
i e U.S. thenimposed Comprehensive Sanctions targeting PDVSA (Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A.), State-owned oil  
: Firm, aiming to cut off Maduro's Access to Oil Revenue — Venezuela's Primary Income Source.  
  
| These sanctions drastically limited Venezuela's Oil Exports to U.S., forcing Caracas to seek Alternative Buyers  
  
Strategic and Economic Considerations  
  
e Energy Security Imperatives: Venezuela possesses World's Don — Roe Doctrine  
Largest Proven Crude Oil Reserves, estimated at over 300 ¢ Reflects aNeo—Monroeist Approach:  
Billion Barrels. o Emphasis on Hemispheric Dominance  
o Gaining Leverage over these reserves could help U.S. o Reduced Tolerance for External Powers  
diversify Energy Sources and Reduce Dependence on (China, Russia) in Americas  
West Asian Oil. o Preference for Unilateral and Transactional  
  
e Limits of Conventional Sanctions: Years of Economic Diplomacy over Multilateralism  
  
Sanctions have failed to dislodge Maduro Government. i ¢ Aligns with broader trends of Neo — Royalism and  
: Personalised Foreign Policy.  
  
o. This has pushed Washington towards More Aggressive  
  
Instruments; such as Maritime Interdictions, aimed at  
choking Venezuela's Oil — based Revenues.  
  
Geopolitical and Strategic Rivalries  
  
e Countering Extra — Regional Powers: Venezuela has strengthened partnerships with China, Russia, Iran, and Cuba  
through Energy Cooperation, Defence Ties and Financial Arrangements.  
o US. views these alignments as a challenge to its Strategic Dominance in Western Hemisphere.  
  
\= US revives Monroe Doctrine (1823 Policy Opposing European / External Interference in Americas) Rhetoric,  
termed “Don — roe Doctrine,” to assert Influence in Americas.  
  
e Renewed Strategic Focus on Caribbean: Region is increasingly treated as a Critical Zone of Influence, Reminiscent of  
Cold War — era Strategic Calculations.  
  
Regime Change Calculus  
  
e Support from Opposition Groups: Sections of Venezuela's Domestic Opposition have endorsed Stronger External  
Pressure, indirectly reinforcing Washington's Interventionist Stance.  
  
e Official Narrative: U.S. justifies its actions under Banner of Counter — Narcotics Operations and National Security  
Enforcement, lending a Legal and Political Framework to its Maritime Actions.  
  
o US Alleges Venezuela's “Cartel of the Suns” Collaborated with FARC to Traffick Cocaine into the United States.  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 05  
  
\=== PAGE 8 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Monroe Doctrine  
  
Nature: Unilateral U.S. Foreign Policy Declaration  
Proclaimed: 1823  
Proposed By: U.S. President James Monroe  
  
Context: Post — Napoleonic Era, when European Powers sought to Re — Colonize Latin America.  
  
Initially defensive, doctrine later became a basis for U.S. Interventionism in Latin America.  
o. Expanded through Roosevelt Corollary (1904): Justified U.S. Intervention to Maintain Stability in  
Western Hemisphere.  
  
o. In Cold War Era, it was used to Counter Soviet Influence in Americas.  
  
Objective: Establish U.S. Dominance and Security in Western Hemisphere & Prevent European Political  
and Military Influence in Americas.  
  
Three Core Principles  
J. Non— Colonization: European Powers must Not establish New Colonies in North or South America.  
2\. Non- Intervention: Europe should Not interfere in Internal Affairs of Independent American States.  
  
3\. U.S. Non — Interference in Europe: U.S. would stay out of European Wars and Colonial Affairs.  
  
Why the UN Struggles to Prevent  
er Unilateral Military Interventions” =  
  
ehictaval Paralysis: The’ Veto teTiap  
  
a ah P5 members (U.S., Russia, China, UK, France) can block any resolution.  
Action stalls when a major power is involved or protecting an ally.  
  
Example: 47 vetoes blocked 37 draft resolutions (2015-2024).  
  
‘Legal Reinterpretatigh’ Weaponizing Self-Defense  
  
States bypass Article 2(4) by redefining military force as “law enforcemen  
or preventive self-defense (Article 51).  
  
Example: U.S. cited ‘narco-terrorism’ in Venezuela.  
Financial Coercion: Institutional Hollowing  
  
Chronic funding shortfalls weaken UN enforcement capacity.  
  
Fact: $2.4B unpaid regular dues, $2.7B peacekeeping shortfall.  
  
Rise of Regionalism: Fragmented Security Governance  
Regional blocs act autonomuusly.  
NATO, AU, and ECOWAS intervene without UNSC approval.  
  
A ERAS ON A RRR  
  
Normative Erosion: The Accountability Vacuum  
  
\\,, Modern conflicts use gray-zone tactics: cyberattacks, PMCs, and proxies.  
  
\* Example: 2017 NotPetya cyberattack disrupted global systems.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 06  
  
\=== PAGE 9 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
\- HOW CAN MULTILATERALISM BI BE REFORMED  
WwW PROMOTE A A FAIR J AND JUST GLOBAL ORDER?,.  
  
STRENGTHENING LEGAL CLARITY  
—= AND CLOSING LOOPHOLES —  
  
\= Evolve international law to explicitly distinguish  
criminal law enforcement vs. use of force  
  
\= Remove ambiguity around “self-defense again  
non-state actors”.  
  
INCENTIVIZING COMPLIANCE  
THROUGH FINANCIAL AND TRADE LEVERS  
  
\= Leverage globali\#a, ‘  
financial architecture.  
  
REVITALIZING THE UN SECURITY  
COUNCIL AND REFORMING THE VETO  
  
\= Reform UNSC procedures & introduce a “veto  
override” mechanism for mass atrocities.  
  
\= Limit P5 Veto use & obligate public justification.  
  
» Align structural reform with }  
principle of collective secur  
  
CODIFYING ACCOUNTABILITY  
FOR GRAY-ZONE AND HYBRID THREATS  
  
\= Create binding “gray-zone accountability  
protocol”.  
  
“SKS  
Monitor cyber-attac  
  
EMBEDDING TRANSPARENCY AND NORMATIVE  
SMU 2) 22s IN GLOBAL GOVERNANCE  
  
\- Adopt co}  
  
toring ofuriter  
  
\= economic & Sina actions.  
  
Skill — Up: ICC, ICJ, Article 2 (4) & 51 of UN Charter, Ker — Frisbie Doctrine, Golden Triangle & Golden Cresent,  
NDPS Act, Darian Gap  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FollowusNow B@O@  
  
07  
  
\=== PAGE 10 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
What was the name of the military operation conducted by US forces in Venezuela?  
(a) Operation Desert Storm (b) Operation Absolute Resolve  
(c) Operation Venezuelan Freedom (d) Operation Narco Shield  
  
Which Venezuelan cities were targeted in the US military strike?  
(a) Maracaibo, Valencia, Barquisimeto (b) Caracas, Miranda, Aragua, La Guaira  
(c) Mérida, Zulia, Tachira (d) Bolivar, Carabobo, Lara  
  
Approximately how many Venezuelans have fled the country since 2013?  
(a) 3 million (b) 5 million (c) 8 million (d) 10 million  
  
What was Venezuela's President Nicolas Maduro accused of by the US?  
(a) Nuclear weapons development (b) Illegal migration, narcotics trafficking, and narco-terrorism  
(c) Cyber warfare (d) Human rights violations only  
  
Which two organizations did Washington designate as Foreign Terrorist Organizations?  
(a) FARC and ELN (b) Tren de Aragua and Cartel de los Soles  
(c) Hezbollah and Hamas (d) MS-13 and Barrio 18  
  
Who declared himself Acting President of Venezuela, challenging Nicolas Maduro?  
(a) Leopoldo Lopez (b) Henrique Capriles (c) Juan Guaido (d) Maria Corina Machado  
  
Which articles of the Venezuelan Constitution did Juan Guaid6 cite when declaring himself Acting President?  
(a) Articles 100 and 150 (b) Articles 233 and 333 (c) Articles 50 and 75 (d) Articles 400 and 500  
  
In which year was Nicolas Maduro sworn in for his controversial second term?  
(a) 2017 (b) 2018 (c) 2019 (d) 2020  
  
What is Venezuela's estimated proven crude oil reserves?  
(a) Over 100 billion barrels (b) Over 200 billion barrels  
(c) Over 300 billion barrels (d) Over 400 billion barrels  
  
Which countries continued to support Maduro's government despite international opposition?  
(a) UK and France (b) Germany and Italy (c) Russia and China (d) Japan and South Korea  
  
What historic US policy doctrine was revived in rhetoric regarding Venezuela?  
(a) Truman Doctrine (b) Monroe Doctrine (c) Eisenhower Doctrine (d) Reagan Doctrine  
  
What year was the Monroe Doctrine originally established?  
(a) 1776 (b) 1823 (c) 1865 (d) 1900  
  
What was the term used for the revived Monroe Doctrine rhetoric?  
(a) New Monroe Policy (b) Trump Doctrine (c) Don-roe Doctrine (d) American Hemisphere Policy  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 08  
  
\=== PAGE 11 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Trump accused the Maduro government of deliberately releasing which groups to migrate toward the US?  
(a) Political dissidents and journalists (b) Prisoners and asylum inmates  
(c) Military personnel and police (d) Healthcare workers and teachers  
  
Which position did Juan Guaido hold when he declared himself Acting President?  
(a) Vice President (b) Head of National Assembly  
(c) Governor of Caracas (d) Minister of Foreign Affairs  
  
What major economic problem has Venezuela been facing?  
(a) Deflation (b) Hyperinflation  
(c) Currency appreciation (d) Trade surplus  
  
The US alleges that Venezuela's "Cartel of the Suns" collaborated with which organization?  
(a) ELN (b) FARC (c) Sendero Luminoso (d) M-19  
  
Which Colombian guerrilla group was mentioned in relation to cocaine trafficking allegations?  
(a) M-19 (b) ELN (c) FARC (d) AUC  
  
What substance crisis did the US link to Venezuela's alleged drug trafficking?  
(a) Heroin and morphine (b) Methamphetamine and LSD  
(c) Cocaine and fentanyl (d) Marijuana and hashish  
  
Venezuela's economy suffered a drastic contraction largely blamed on which factors?  
(a) Natural disasters and climate change (b) Corruption, poor governance, and overdependence on oil  
(c) International sanctions alone (d) Population decline  
  
\= | QUICKBYTE-NEWS INA MINUTE |  
SI International  
  
US issues Presidential Memo to Exit and Defund 66 International Bodies (UN — affiliated Entities: 31 & Non — UN  
Organisations: 35), Citing National Interest and Sovereignty Concerns.  
  
Bulgaria adopts Euro as Official Currency, Joining Eurozone as Its 21“ Member.  
  
Ws: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
\~\~ Polity & Governance  
  
Digital India launches “Land Stack” and “Glossary of Revenue Terms” to Modernise and Digitise Land Records under  
DILRMP.  
Union Minister of State for Earth Sciences launched India's 1“ Open—Sea Marine Fish Farming Project in Andaman Sea.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 09  
  
\=== PAGE 12 ===  
/\_", January 2026  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
STRATEGIC  
IMPORTANCE  
  
OF GREENLAND  
  
Why in News?  
  
Denmark PM (Mette Frederiksen) rejects US Claims on Greenland, Reaffirms Danish Sovereignty over Autonomous  
  
Arctic Territory.  
  
When did Greenland become part of Denmark?  
  
e Greenland (World's Largest Island | PM: Jens — Frederik Nielsen)  
became a Danish Colony in Early 18" Century, after an expedition led by  
Danish — Norwegian Missionary Hans Egede arrived in 1721.  
  
o 1In1979, it becamea Self— Governing Territory.  
o Since 2009, Greenland has Right to declare Independence through a  
Referendum.  
  
e Arctic Island is one of Denmark's Two Autonomous Territories, Other  
One being Faroe Islands.  
  
o Region hosts Kaffeklubben Island, Recognised as World's  
  
Northernmost Point of Land.  
  
e Since Denmark is a part of NATO, Greenland is By Default a part of  
  
Washington, DC Allantic Ocean  
  
North Atlantic Military Alliance. United States  
  
e Greenland is Not a Member State of European Union, but is associated  
with it as one of 25 EU Overseas Countries and Territories. Hence,  
  
Greenlanders are considered to be EU Citizens.  
o In 1973, Greenland joined now — defunct European Community with Denmark, but left in 1985. EU has replaced  
  
European Community.  
  
Historical Overview of US — Greenland Relations  
  
U.S. seized Temporary Control of Greenland in WWII to Prevent Nazi Germany from Exploiting Danish Colony  
after Denmark's Occupation. i  
  
In 1946, U.S. proposed a $100 Million offer to Denmark for Outright Purchase of Greenland.  
1951 US— Denmark Defence Agreement formalized American Military Access to Greenland.  
  
Today, U.S. maintains Pituffik Space Base (formerly known as Thule Air Base), a pivotal facility for monitoring  
potential missile threats from nations including Russia, China, and North Korea.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 10  
  
\=== PAGE 13 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Why Greenland Matters Strategically?  
  
e = Military and Security Significance  
o Geostrategic Location: Greenland lies between North peer rrrrrrerssessssssssseeceecereeesasssseeececeeneesaay  
America and Europe, making it a Linchpin in Arctic and Trans Extra Shots  
  
—Atlantic Security Architecture. i © Louisiana Purchase (1803): U.S. acquired  
: Louisiana from France for $15 million. H  
  
ie Alaska Purchase (1867): U.S. obtained i  
i Alaska from Russia for $7.2 million.  
e Danish West Indies (1917): U.S. purchased  
i these islands from Denmark, which are  
  
\= Greenland lies within strategic GIUK (Greenland,  
Iceland, United Kingdom) Gap, Key Chokepoint for  
  
Monitoring Naval Movements in North Atlantic  
o. Missile Defence & Early Warning: Hosts Critical  
  
Infrastructure for U.S. Ballistic Missile Early — Warning  
  
System, enabling Detection of Missile Launches over  
Arctic.  
  
o Space & Intelligence Assets: Ideal Location for Ground Stations tracking Polar — Orbiting Satellites, which are  
essential for Military Intelligence and Surveillance, GPS and Navigation, Weather and Climate Monitoring  
  
o NATO Relevance: Enhances NATO's Ability to monitor Russian Activities in Arctic and North Atlantic.  
  
¢ Critical Minerals and Natural Resources  
o Rare Earth Elements: Greenland possesses Large Untapped Reserves of rare earth minerals, crucial for  
Semiconductors, Renewable Energy Technologies, Defence Systems  
o Strategic Diversification: Offers the West an Alternative supply Chain to China — dominated REE Markets, aligning  
with Broader Geo — Economic Decoupling Efforts.  
e Emerging Arctic Shipping Routes  
o Impact of Climate Change: Melting Arctic Ice is opening New Maritime Corridors, especially Transpolar Sea Route.  
o Global Trade Implications: These routes could Reduce Travel Time between Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, Lower  
Fuel and Shipping Costs, Bypass Strategic Chokepoints like Panama Canal and Suez Canal.  
o Economic and Strategic Leverage: Control and Influence over Arctic Sea Lanes will shape Future Global Trade and  
Naval Power Projection.  
e Great Power Competition in Arctic  
o US-China — Russia Dynamics: China labels itself a “Near — Arctic State” and is investing in Arctic Research and  
Infrastructure & Russia has heavily militarised Arctic Coastline.  
v The U.S. views Greenland as Central to countering Both.  
o Sovereignty Sensitivities: Denmark's Firm Stance highlights Tensions between Territorial Sovereignty and Strategic  
  
Ambitions of Major Powers.  
  
EU's 'Bazooka' or Anti — Coercion Instrument  
  
| French President urges European Union to invoke Anti — Coercion Instrument 'Trade Bazooka', for the first time,  
igainst US Tariffs amid Greenland Dispute. i  
  
Primarily a Deterrent Tool, with capacity for Proportionate Retaliation if Coercion Persists.  
  
EU Legal Mechanism designed to respond when a Non — EU Country seeks to Pressure or Coerce EU or its  
  
Member States by Applying or Threatening Measures that affect Trade or Investment.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ ll  
  
\=== PAGE 14 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News aa  
  
Objective:  
  
oO  
  
oO  
  
oO  
  
Deter Economic Coercion  
Protect EU's Strategic Autonomy and Policy Space  
  
Ensure Disputes are resolved through Dialogue First, with escalation only if necessary.  
  
Possible Countermeasures under ACI  
  
oO  
  
oO  
oO  
oO  
  
Trade Measures: Import/Export Restrictions on Goods and Services  
  
Investment Measures: Restrictions on Foreign Direct Investment  
  
Market Access: Limiting Access to EU Internal Market  
  
IP & Services: Measures Affecting Intellectual Property Rights, Public Procurement and Services  
  
NATO: Members since 1949 2004  
  
NATO was created by 12 countries from Europe \> \_—— Estonia \~ Bulgaria  
  
and North America on 4 April 1949. os  
  
Since then, 20 more  
  
countries have.  
  
joined NATO“  
  
through 10 roundg\! -  
  
of enlargement. 4 slovenia  
ea  
  
Any decision to invite a  
country to join the Alliance Is - 2009  
  
taken by the North Atlantic oo  
Council, NATO's principal CO Albania @@W Croatia  
  
political decision-making  
body, on the basis of North  
consensus among all Allies. Amorics 2017  
  
}) Montenegro  
  
1949 j  
12 Founding Members 1952.  
  
Pescium) EH uuxembourg (BB Greece  
  
ts) Canada @m Netherlands  
e Denmark rt Norway  
  
Perce @ rorwest  
  
rt Iceland GTR united Kingdom  
  
Qiey \>) Borited sates  
  
NATO's essential purpose is to @ | AlLNATO  
safeguard the freedom and security of = decisions are  
  
all its members through POLITICAL Ft made by  
  
& MILITARY means, to ensure and consensus, after discussion  
secure a lasting peace in Europe and and consultation among  
North America member countries.  
  
military power to undertake crisis-  
  
management operations i)  
7 Brussels, Belgium  
  
Article 5  
  
“Article 5 provides that if a NATO Ally is the victim of an \*  
armed attack, each and every other member of the Alliance  
  
will consider this act of violence as an armed attack against  
  
all members and will take the actions it deems necessary to  
  
assist the Ally attacked."  
  
Q If diplomatic efforts fail, NATO has the  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 12  
  
\=== PAGE 15 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Who is the current Prime Minister of Denmark who rejected US claims on Greenland?  
(a) Lars Lokke Rasmussen (b) Mette Frederiksen  
(c) Helle Thorning-Schmidt (d) Anders Fogh Rasmussen  
  
When did Greenland become a Danish colony?  
(a) Early 17th Century (b) Early 18th Century —(c) Early 19th Century (d) Early 20th Century  
  
Who led the expedition that arrived in Greenland in 1721?  
(a) Vitus Bering (b) Erik the Red (c) Hans Egede (d) Roald Amundsen  
  
When did Greenland become a self-governing territory?  
(a) 1973 (b) 1979 (c) 1985 (d) 2009  
  
Since which year has Greenland had the right to declare independence through a referendum?  
(a) 1979 (b) 1985 (c) 2000 (d) 2009  
  
What is Denmark's other autonomous territory besides Greenland?  
(a) Iceland (b) Faroe Islands (c) Jan Mayen (d) Svalbard  
  
What is the name of the island in Greenland recognized as the world's northernmost point of land?  
(a) Ellesmere Island (b) Alert Island (c) Kaffeklubben Island (d) Nord Island  
  
Is Greenland a member of the European Union?  
(a) Yes, full member (b) No, but associated as EU Overseas Country and Territory  
(c) Yes, but with special status (d) No, and not associated  
  
When did Greenland join the European Community with Denmark?  
(a) 1968 (b) 1973 (c) 1979 (d) 1985  
  
When did Greenland leave the European Community?  
(a) 1979 (b) 1982 (c) 1985 (d) 1990  
  
What does GIUK stand for in strategic terms?  
(a) Greenland, Ireland, United Kingdom (b) Greenland, Iceland, United Kingdom  
(c) Greenland, Iceland, Ukraine (d) Germany, Iceland, United Kingdom  
  
What strategic function does the GIUK Gap serve?  
(a) Trade route monitoring (b) Weather observation  
(c) Naval movement monitoring in North Atlantic (d) Oil exploration  
  
Greenland hosts critical infrastructure for which US system?  
(a) Cyber security system (b) Ballistic Missile Early-Warning System  
(c) Weather prediction system (d) Communication relay system  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 13  
  
\=== PAGE 16 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
4\. | Why is Greenland ideal for ground stations tracking satellites?  
  
5\. | What type of minerals does Greenland possess in large untapped reserves?  
(a) Precious metals (b) Fossil fuels (c) Rare Earth Elements  
  
6\. Which country currently dominates the Rare Earth Elements (REE) market?  
(a) United States (b) Russia (c) China  
  
7\. What is causing new Arctic shipping routes to open?  
(c) International agreements (d) Deep-sea drilling  
8\. | What is the name of the emerging Arctic shipping route mentioned?  
  
(a) Northwest Passage (b) Northern Sea Route  
(c) Transpolar Sea Route (d) Arctic Circle Route  
  
9\. Which strategic chokepoints could new Arctic routes bypass?  
  
(a) Strait of Hormuz and Bab-el-Mandeb (b) Panama Canal and Suez Canal  
(c) Strait of Gibraltar and Bosphorus (d) Strait of Malacca and Sunda Strait  
  
20\. How does China label itself in relation to the Arctic?  
(a) Arctic Observer State (b) Near-Arctic State  
(c) Arctic Partner Nation (d) Polar Research State  
  
W: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
  
(a) Low population density (b) Clear skies year-round  
(c) Location for tracking polar-orbiting satellites (d) Minimal electromagnetic interference  
  
(a) Advanced icebreaker technology (b) Climate change and melting Arctic ice  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
e Hungary's Farmers and Volunteers launch 'Water Guardians' Initiative to Restore Local Water and Combat  
  
Desertification in Homokhatsag Region.  
  
o Water Guardians' Initiative in Hungary Aims to Retain Local Water, Boost Soil Moisture, Agriculture, and  
  
Vegetation.  
  
e Amazon's Stingless Bees (Meliponini) granted Legal Rights, Becoming 1" Insect Species to Receive Nature — based  
  
Protections.  
  
e American Biologist Toby Kiers won Tyler Prize (Nobel for the Environment) for Pioneering Research on Mycorrhizal  
  
Networks and Environmental Sustainability.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
14  
  
\=== PAGE 17 ===  
US INITIATES  
FORMATION of  
in ‘BOARD OF PEACE’  
ma FOR GAZA  
  
Nutt  
  
Why in News?  
  
US President begins process to constitute 'Board of Peace’; under 20 — Point Gaza Peace Plan to End Conflict; officially  
  
titled Comprehensive Plan to End the Gaza Conflict.  
US —- announced Board of Peace meets with 19 Countries; India Absent from High-Level Peace Initiative.  
  
Steps Initiated to Operationalise Gaza Governance Bodies, including National Committee for Administration of Gaza  
(NCAG) and International Stabilization Force (ISF).  
  
Board of Peace  
Type: US — led Inter — Governmental Body, established under  
PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST  
  
UN Security Council Resolution 2803 (2025).  
  
o Charter contains 13 Articles covering Membership Rules, ; 4 bia aa } 1 AK  
  
Financial Contributions and Dispute Redressal.  
Envisioned as a New International Body with a Transitional  
Governance Role for Post— Conflict Gaza.  
o Combines Elements of International Oversight, Political  
  
Coordination and Developmental Administration.  
  
Proposed Mandate  
o Supervise and Guide Functioning of NCAG (Civil =  
  
Administration) and ISF (Security and Stabilization).  
o © Mobilise International Financial and Technical Assistance. Invited Nations to US — led Gaza Board  
H Accepted: Israel, Hungary, Vietnam, Saudi {  
Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, UAE, Qatar,  
Morocco, Argentina, Azerbaijan,  
  
o Ensure Transparency, Coordination and Accountability  
during Gaza's Transition from Conflict to Reconstruction  
  
dG .  
anewovernance Kazakhstan, Belarus, Paraguay.  
  
Institutional Structure be Declined: France, Norway, Sweden,  
  
o Chair: US President Donald Trump  
  
Denmark.  
Undecided: India, Russia, China, Pakistan  
  
\= Trump will also serve separately as Inaugural  
  
Representative of United States.  
\= Chairman can be removed only ifhe resigns Voluntarily or is Unanimously declared incapable by Executive Board.  
o Executive Board: Comprising Select Global Leaders and Prominent International Figures; including Former UK Prime  
  
Minister Tony Blair, US Secretary of State Marco Rubio, World Bank President Ajay Banga, Jared Kushner (Trump's  
Son—in-Law) and others.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 15  
  
\=== PAGE 18 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
o HighRepresentative for Gaza: Bulgarian diplomat Nickolay Mladenov, serving as Primary On —the— Ground Liaison.  
  
\= — Actas On—the—Ground Link between Board of Peace and NCAG.  
o National Committee for the Administration of Gaza: A 15 - Member Committee of Politically Independent Palestinian  
  
Technocrats, chaired by Ali Shaath (a former Palestinian Authority Deputy Minister), responsible for Day — to — Day  
Civil Administration.  
  
o Tenure: Rotational Membership of3 Years Without Mandatory Financial Contribution.  
o Permanent Membership: Available through a reported contribution of USD 1 Billion.  
e Gaza Executive Board: A Supporting Operational Body that Coordinates On—the— Ground Activities.  
o Members include representatives from US, UK, Turkey, Qatar, Egypt, UAE, Cyprus and Netherlands.  
o No Palestinian Representative is included on this board.  
e Binding Obligation: Membership requires a Country to Consent to be Bound by the Charter.  
  
e — Itsinitial authorization lasts until 31“ Dec 2027.  
  
Broader Significance  
  
New Model of Global Governance: Represents a move away from Traditional Universal Multilateral  
Institutions towards Mini—Lateral Leader—centric Mechanisms. :  
o — \_Emphasises Political Authority, Resource Mobilisation and Rapid Decision — Making over Consensus —  
  
based Diplomacy.  
  
Beyond Gaza: Though focused on Gaza, Board is being projected as a Template for managing Complex Global  
Conflicts. H  
o Signals evolving US thinking on Conflict Resolution, Post — War Governance and International  
  
Institutional Design.  
  
Why is Reform of UN System Urgent?  
Erosion of Institutional Continuity: UN Peacebuilding Efforts often suffer from Fragmentation, as Ad— Hoc  
  
Missions end once immediate crises subside.  
o Proposed Mechanisms like Board of Peace aim to Institutionalise Long — Term Political Engagement  
  
and Prevent Relapse into Conflict.  
  
Structural Inertia in UNSC Reform: Prolonged Deadlock over Comprehensive UN Security Council Reform  
has paralysed Timely Action.  
o Given the Urgency of Contemporary Conflicts, Incremental and Functional Institutional Innovation  
  
within Existing Structures is Essential.  
  
Existing Legal Authority for Change: Under Article 22 of UN Charter, General Assembly has Authority to  
establish Subsidiary Bodies without requiring Charter Amendments, enabling faster and legally sound  
  
reform pathways.  
  
Reform from Within, Not Replacement: Rather than undermining or replacing UNSC, initiatives like Board  
  
of Peace seek to strengthen Coordination and Follow — Through, ensuring Peace Agreements Translate into  
  
Durable Governance and Institutional Stability.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 16  
  
\=== PAGE 19 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Key Features of U.S. Gaza Peace Plan  
  
Deradicalized and Secure Gaza: Proposal  
envisions Gaza as a Demilitarised, Terror — Free  
Zone, ensuring No Threats to Neighbouring  
States.  
  
Ceasefire and De-escalation: An Immediate  
Ceasefire is Mandated, Halting All Military  
Actions by Both Sides.  
  
Hostage Release: All Hostages—whether Alive  
or Deceased—must be released within 72 Hours  
of Israel's Formal Acceptance of Plan.  
  
Interfaith Reconciliation: Plan includes  
Creation of an Interfaith Dialogue Platform to  
promote Religious Harmony and Co —  
  
Existence.  
  
Economic Reconstruction: Proposes a Special  
Economic Zone in Gaza, supported by  
International Investment and Employment  
Generation to rebuild Region's Economy.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
ISRAEL'S WAR ON GAZA  
  
Trump's 20-point Gaza plan  
  
United States President Donald Trump has proposed a 20-point peace plan to end  
the war in Gaza after holding talks with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.  
  
Summary of the 20 poi  
  
\[1 caza will become a “deradicalised terror-free zone”. |  
2\. Gaza will be redeveloped to improve life for its people.  
  
3\. War ends immediately once both sides agree, with Israeli  
withdrawal to an agreed-upon line and ceasefire.  
  
4\. All captives, alive and deceased, returned within  
‘72 hours of Israel's acceptance.  
  
5\. Israel frees 250 Palestinian life-sentence prisoners, 1,700 detainees, and exchanges remains proportionally.  
  
\[ ‘6. Hamas members who decommission their weapons get amnesty or safe passage abroad.  
  
7\. Full humanitarian aid enters immediately to rebuild essential infrastructure.  
  
8\. Aid flows freely via UN and Red Crescent, Rafah crossing reopens under agreement.  
  
9, Gaza governed temporarily by a technocratic Palestinian committee under an international,  
board including former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair and led by Trump.  
  
10\. Trump economic plan to rebuild Gaza with global investment and job creation.  
Tl. Special economic zone established with favourable trade terms.  
12\. No forced displacement. People are free to stay, leave or return.  
  
TB. Hamas excluded from governance, all weapons dismantled.  
  
14, Regional partners guarantee Hamas's compliance and security.  
  
15\. International Stabilization Force (ISF) deployed to  
secure Gaza and train police.  
  
16\. Israel won't occupy Gaza, withdraws as stability  
and demilitarisation progress. Map published by the official White  
House Rapid Response X account  
17\. If Hamas rejects the plan, areas handed over  
from the Israeli military to the ISF will proceed. Israeli military's current  
line of control  
  
18, Interfaith dialogue launched to promote Initial withdrawal  
  
“values of tolerance and peaceful co-existence.” \~capthves released  
19\. Reforms pave the way for “Palestinian ‘Second withdrawal  
self-determination and statehood”. -1SF moblised  
  
iti | Third withdrawal  
20\. The US leads talks for a peaceful political - ‘security buffer zone”  
  
future between Israel and Palestinians.  
  
Evolution of Israel Palestine Conflict  
  
In 19" Century, an Austro — Hungarian Jewish Journalist "Theodor Herzl" propagated Idea of a Jewish  
  
Homeland in Palestine for Jews.  
  
Armistice  
line  
Jordanian  
controlled  
Egyptian  
controlled  
  
JUDAS  
  
By 1916, Palestine came under British Control  
after Sykes — Picot Agreement (Great Britain and  
  
France).  
o. This led to Division of Old Ottoman Turkish  
Empire.  
  
In 1917, British Government announced Balfour  
  
Declaration, hoping to gain Jewish Support for World War I, which  
promised “Establishment in Palestine a National Home for Jewish  
People”.  
  
o After 1“ World War, League of Nations granted Britain mandate to  
  
govern Palestine and implement Balfour Declaration.  
  
UN presented a Partition Plan to create Independent Jewish and Arab  
States in Palestine which was Not Accepted by Most of Arab Nations.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 17  
  
\=== PAGE 20 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
o In 1947, UN voted to establish separate Palestinian and Jewish States in the region dividing Palestine. This plan was  
  
rejected by Arabs.  
  
e Formation of State of Israel: On 14 May 1948, Israel was declared an Independent State with David Ben Gurion as Prime  
  
Minister.  
  
Aftermath of Formation of Israel  
  
e = 1" Arab — Israeli War (1948 — 1949): 1“ Arab — Israeli War broke out with 5 Arab  
  
States (Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt) invading Israel. Related Facts  
o \_ Israel, having won the war, though, now controlled more area than they would e 2008 — 2009: Gaza War  
have under UN Plan. i (Operation Cast Lead)  
o Palestinians call this war "Nakba" (Catastrophe) as they became Stateless. ie 2012: Gaza War (Operation |  
e = 2™ Arab — Israeli War / Suez Crisis (1956): In 1956, Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt Pilar of Defense) i  
; . \> 2014: Gaza War (Operation }  
nationalised Suez Canal. Protective Edge) i  
  
o Israel attacked Sinai Peninsula and retook Canal with British and French  
  
Support.  
¢ Six —Day War / 3" Arab — Israeli War (1967): Fought  
between Israel and Arab States (Egypt, Syria and  
Jordan).  
o Israel won Control of West Bank and East  
Jerusalem (Jordan), Golan Heights (Syria), Gaza  
Strip and Sinai Peninsula (Egypt).  
¢ Yom Kippur War / 4" Arab-Israeli War (1973): On 6  
Oct 1973, Syria and Egypt launched Airstrikes against  
Israel on Jewish Holy Day of Yom Kippur.  
¢ Camp David Accord (1978): Both Egypt and Israel,  
encouraged by US, were considering possibility of  
Peace Negotiations.  
o 5 — year Transitional Period of Limited  
Palestinian Self— Rule in West Bank & Gaza.  
o. Egypt officially recognizing Israel.  
  
o Return of Sinai Peninsula to Egypt.  
  
e 1" Palestinian Intifada (1987 — 1993): Uprising of  
Palestinians against Israeli Occupation of Gaza and  
West Bank.  
  
o This is called 1“ Palestinian Intifada (Arabic  
word meaning "Shaking Off").  
  
e Oslo Peace Accords: Intifada came to an end with  
Oslo Peace Accords signed in 1993 and a 2™  
Accord signed in 1995 between the then Israeli  
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat  
(Leader of PLO).  
  
2023: Gaza War (Operation  
Al—Aqsa Flood)  
  
ri  
  
| Israeli Land } } Israeli Land  
  
Palestinian M@iPalestinian ;  
Land Land J  
  
Palestinian Liberation Organisation  
  
Established in 1964 during I” Palestinian Congress, i  
convened by Arab States.  
Aim: Freeing Palestine from Clutches of Israel and Jewish i  
Domination & setting up Dominance of Muslim Brotherhood i  
in Arab World.  
o Establishment of Independent Palestinian State within :  
1947 UN Partition Plan Borders. :  
  
o Rejection of Balfour Declaration, which facilitated :  
Establishment of Israel. i  
  
1” Chairman of PLO: Ahmed Shukeiri :  
PLO was granted Non — State Observer Status in 1974 by UN. :  
o Permanent Observer Status in 1975. :  
o Non-Member Observer State status in 2012 H  
Yasser Arafat becomes 1" Non— Member State Representative  
to Address UN General Assembly.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 18  
  
\=== PAGE 21 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www \_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
2™ Palestinian Intifada (2000-2005): Israeli Army withdrew from parts of West Bank in 1997.  
  
Gaza Conflict (2021): Israeli police raid Al— Aqsa Mosque, leading to an 11 — day war between Israel and Hamas; casualties  
on both sides.  
  
2023: Recent Attacks by Hamas on Israel.  
  
Jan 2025: Hamas\~— Israel have agreed to a ceasefire.  
  
e = Algeria: I“ Country to officially recognise an Independent Palestinian State.  
¢ Sweden: 1" EU Nation to recognize as a State.  
  
i e In1974, India became I" Non—Arab State to recognize PLO.  
  
o In 1988, Indiawas one of 1" Countries to recognize Palestinian State.  
  
e State Recognition defined as Formal Acknowledgment of Sovereignty, Criteria based on 1933 Montevideo  
Convention  
  
Territorial Disputes of Isracl  
  
e West Bank: Between Israel and Jordan. rigHts  
  
HEIGHTS SYRIA  
  
} Sea of Galilee  
  
i H Tiberias,  
: e Ramallah: De Facto Administrative ;  
  
Capital of Palestine. i Mediterraneamises =p  
| e Gaza: Between Israel and Egypt. aa  
o Described as “World's Largest | fae  
Open — Air Prison” due to Strict ‘Ramallah  
Movement Restrictions placed by Jerussiemty ok @lia  
  
Israel Bethlehem”  
  
@Mitzpe Shalem  
  
e¢ Golan Heights: Between Israel and Deed See  
  
Syria.  
o Israel captured from Syria in 1967  
  
War. JORDAN  
  
e USA has officially recognized ISRAEL  
  
Jerusalem and Golan Heights as a part of  
i Israel.  
e Al Aqsa Mosque: One of Holiest EGYPT  
Structures in Islamic Faith known by  
Muslims as Haram al — Sharif (Noble i  
Sanctuary) & by Jews as Temple Mount.  
  
‘Areas which came under trael contr after the 1967 war  
  
silat  
  
Skill — Up: United Nations, New York Declaration on Palestine Issue, Convention on Prevention and Punishment  
of Crime of Genocide, UNRAW, UNHRC  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 19  
  
\=== PAGE 22 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
ISRAEL-PALESTINE CONFLICT  
  
The Israel-Palestine conflict is a long-standing geopolitical dispute over territory and self-determination in the Middle East.  
  
| BEGINNING (3) Second (1995)  
») UN adopted Resolution 184 - the Partition Plan in 1947 »\> Expanded on Oslo | Accords  
¥) State of Israel created in 1948, sparking the first »\> Mandated complete Israeli withdrawal from several  
Arab-Israeli War (Israel won) cities and towns in West Bank  
  
» Palestinians displaced  
  
»\> Division of territory into - State of Israel, West Bank | |POosT 2000 CONFLICT AND RESPONSES  
  
and Gaza Strip ‘x’ 2043 - US-led peace process began  
||INITIAL TENSIONS AND CONFLICTS (1956-1979) \\) 2014-48 - Gaza Conflict (2014)  
™) Suez Crisis and Israeli invasion of Sinai Peninsula in 1956 » Palestine announced break from territorial divisions  
») Six-Day War (1967) - Israel gained control over Sinai under Oslo Accords (2015)  
Peninsula, Gaza Strip, West Bank, East Jerusalem and ‘s) 2048-20 - US Cancelled funding for Palestinian refugees  
Golan Heights under UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA)  
  
Controversy over Jerusalem as Capital » US proposed "Peace to Prosperity" plan  
  
Ei Israel view: Complete and united Jerusalem \\) 2020 - Abraham Accords  
I Palestinians view: East Jerusalem future capital (s) 2022-2023:  
  
» Israel raids on Jenin refugee camp  
  
r \> Hamas launched “Operation Al-Aqsa Flood” and Israel  
and Syria launched “Operation Iron Swords” (both in 2023)  
  
») Camp David Accords (1979) b/w Egypt and Israel Israel declared a State of War  
  
» India’s Stand:  
  
Supports a Two State solution for Israel and Palestine  
Condemned the recent attack by Hamas on Israel  
  
») Yom Kippur War (1973) - Surprise attack by Egypt  
  
Intifada (Arabic for ‘shake off’)  
  
Il First Intifada - 1987 to 1993  
\# Led to the foundation of Hamas (1987) - a  
Palestinian political party designated as a foreign Considered gccupied territory by most of  
  
terrorist org by US the international community  
  
LEBANON  
oN Damascus  
  
Response - Madrid Conference 1994 (chaired by  
the US and Russia) ‘on; SYRIA  
  
If Second Intifada - 2000-2005  
Il The latest escalation (2023) is being called the rel viv  
beginning of “Third Intifada”  
  
Gaza city  
||OSLO ACCORDS (MEDIATED BY US) mn  
ISRAEL /  
‘) First (1993) foe  
» Estd framework for Palestinian self-governance in  
aver  
West Bank and Gaza  
»\> Enabled mutual recognition between Israel and Palestine \\h  
20 mies i avo)  
  
/RIBBIA  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 20  
  
\=== PAGE 23 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
10\.  
  
12\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
What is the official title of the Gaza Peace Plan?  
(a) Gaza Peace Initiative (b) 20-Point Gaza Peace Plan  
(c) Comprehensive Plan to End the Gaza Conflict (d) Gaza Reconstruction Plan  
  
How many countries met with the US-announced Board of Peace?  
(a) 15 (b) 17 (c) 19 (d) 21  
  
Was India included in the high-level peace initiative?  
(a) Yes, as a permanent member (b) Yes, as a rotational member  
(c) No, India was absent (d) Yes, as an observer  
  
Under which UN Security Council Resolution was the Board of Peace established?  
(a) Resolution 2701 (2024) (b) Resolution 2803 (2025)  
(c) Resolution 2900 (2025) (d) Resolution 2750 (2024)  
  
How many articles does the Board of Peace charter contain?  
(a) 10 (b) 13 (c) 15 (d) 20  
  
What does NCAG stand for?  
(a) National Council for Administration of Gaza (b) National Committee for Administration of Gaza  
(c) National Coordination for Administration of Gaza\_(d) National Commission for Administration of Gaza  
  
What does ISF stand for?  
(a) International Security Force (b) International Stability Fund  
(c) International Stabilization Force (d) International Support Framework  
  
Who chairs the Board of Peace?  
(a) UN Secretary-General (b) US President Donald Trump  
(c) EU President (d) World Bank President  
  
Under what condition can the Chairman be removed?  
  
(a) By majority vote  
  
(b) By two-thirds vote  
  
(c) Only if he resigns voluntarily or is unanimously declared incapable by Executive Board  
(d) By Security Council resolution  
  
Who is the World Bank President mentioned in the Executive Board?  
(a) David Malpass (b) Jim Yong Kim (c) Ajay Banga (d) Robert Zoellick  
  
Who is mentioned as Trump's son-in-law on the Executive Board?  
(a) Stephen Miller (b) Jared Kushner (c) Marco Rubio (d) Mike Pompeo  
  
Who is the High Representative for Gaza?  
(a) Tony Blair (b) Marco Rubio (c) Nickolay Mladenov (d) Ali Shaath  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 21  
  
\=== PAGE 24 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What is Nickolay Mladenov's nationality?  
(a) American (b) British (c) Bulgarian (d) German  
  
How many members are in the National Committee for the Administration of Gaza?  
(a) 10 (b) 13 (c) 15 (d) 20  
  
Who chairs the National Committee for the Administration of Gaza?  
(a) Nickolay Mladenov (b) Ali Shaath (c) Marco Rubio (d) Tony Blair  
  
What was Ali Shaath's previous position?  
(a) Palestinian Authority Minister (b) Palestinian Authority Deputy Minister  
(c) UN Representative (d) Hamas Leader  
  
What is the tenure for rotational membership in the Board of Peace?  
(a) 2 years (b) 3 years (c) 4 years (d) 5 years  
  
What is the reported contribution required for permanent membership?  
(a) USD 500 Million (b) USD 750 Million (c) USD 1 Billion (d) USD 2 Billion  
  
Which countries are NOT mentioned as members of the Gaza Executive Board?  
(a) US, UK, Turkey (b) Qatar, Egypt, UAE (c) Cyprus, Netherlands (d) Palestine, Israel  
  
Until when does the initial authorization of the Board last?  
(a) 31st December 2026 (b) 31st December 2027  
(c) 31st December 2028 (d) 31st December 2029  
  
Ws: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
\~\~ Defence  
  
Defence Minister inaugurated Fully Automated Medium Calibre Ammunition Manufacturing Facility at Solar Defence &  
  
Aerospace Limited.  
  
o Indigenous Defence Production: ¢1.51 Lakh Crore & Defence Exports: $24,000 Crore (FY 2024-25)  
  
DRDO successfully launches 2 Pralay Missiles from Odisha Coast.  
  
o -Pralay Missile: DRDO — developed Short — range Surface — to — Surface Quasi — Ballistic Missile with 150 — 500 km  
Range.  
  
India commissions ICGS Samudra Pratap, built by Goa Shipyard Limited, Largest Indian Coast Guard Vessel, 1“ of Two  
  
Indigenous Pollution Control Ships Commissioned.  
  
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited's Dhruvy — NG Helicopter completes Maiden Flight in Bengaluru, showcasing India's  
  
Indigenous Twin — Engine Multi— Role Design.  
  
India to roll out 1“ Indigenous C —295 Transport Aircraft by Sep 2026 from Airbus — Tata Vadodara Facility.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 22  
  
\=== PAGE 25 ===  
/""’. January 2026  
  
\=, TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
GEOPOLITICAL  
BATTLE  
  
OVER DIEGO  
GARCIA  
  
Why in News?  
Trump criticises UK's Plan to return Diego Garcia to Mauritius, citing Strategic Importance of US Military Base.  
  
Why the Issue is Sensitive?  
  
US Concerns: Any Sovereignty Change is seen as potentially affecting Strategic Autonomy and Base Security.  
  
Geopolitics: Rising Competition in Indian Ocean Region involving China, US and Regional Powers.  
  
Decolonisation vs Security: Tension between International Legal Norms and Realpolitik Security Interests.  
  
UK Cedes Sovereignty of Chagos Islands to Mauritius  
  
e Britain has agreed to transfer Sovereignty of Chagos Islands to Mauritius.  
Chagos Islands  
  
¢ UK and Mauritius reached an agreement where UK ceded its claims over Chagos ; , Comprises of 58 i  
  
Archipelago. i Islands, with Diego  
e Agreement allows UK to Retain Sovereign Rights over Diego Garcia, where a Joint UK — i Garcia being Largest.  
US Military Base will Remain Operational for an Initial Period of 99 years. i e Location: Central  
  
Indian Ocean.  
  
Chagos Islands Dispute  
e UK Declares Chagos Islands as Overseas Territory: In 1965, UK declared Chagos Islands  
  
as a British Indian Ocean Territory.  
  
o When Mauritius gained independence in 1968, Chagos remained with ”  
IRAQ IRAN (gs  
  
Britain. oe  
  
e Forced Depopulation of Chagossians: Between 1968 and 1973, UK and US ony (Om  
forcibly removed Native Chagossians to make way for Military Base. ae)  
  
e Legal Action by Mauritius: In 2015, Mauritius initiated Legal Proceedings a  
against UK at Permanent Court of Arbitration (The Hague), challenging UK's Py INDIAN  
Sovereignty Claims and addressing Forced Removal of Chagossians. S OCEAN Ao  
o UK resisted, insisting that Issue should remain Bilateral Matter. E quate MALDIVES  
  
\-  
  
e¢ Permanent Court of Arbitration's Ruling Against UK: In 2015, Permanent Court aE ott MhiPeleg,  
of Arbitration ruled that UK had violated Mauritius' Rights under United Nations  
Convention on Law of the Sea(UNCLOS). Diego Garcia  
  
o Court found that UK had Ulterior Motives when it created a Marine —  
MADAGASCAR  
Protected Area around Chagos Islands in 2010, intentionally preventing 42 50, 0 mi  
  
. © 2004 EB, Inc. 60°E ° 500 1000 km  
Return of Chagossians.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 23  
  
\=== PAGE 26 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations andNews ROE  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
o Ruling highlighted that British and American Defense  
  
Colonial History of Chagos  
  
Interests were prioritized over Mauritius' Rights & UK's \_ , ,  
: e Discovered by Portuguese Navigators in }  
16" Century.  
  
e = Islands later came under French Control,  
  
Actions were deemed a Violation of Good Faith.  
  
e UNGeneral Assembly Vote: In 2017, UNGA voted on Mauritius’  
  
Resolution t k an Advi Opini Ch Islands fi  
esolution to seek an Advisory Opinion on Chagos Islands from alongwith Mauritius and Réunion.  
  
International Court of Justice. . . i  
After Napoleon's Defeat, Britain took :  
  
e International Court of Justice Ruling: In 2019, ICJ ordered UK to Control of both Chagos and Mauritius. H  
return Chagos Islands to Mauritius. | o In 1814, France ceded Islands to  
co Mauritius argued that it had been Coerced into giving up British.  
Islands during Colonial Rule, in violationof UNResolution \~\~ S\~CST«7;373;7;7  
1514, which Prohibited Breakup of Colonies Before Independence.  
o UKclaimed that ICJ had No Jurisdiction over the matter. uvtntnstntnenstnenstnnneintnenetnenssee ,  
Significance of Mauritius for India Diego Garcia  
e Strategic Location: Mauritius Emerges as Strategic Node in India's Western Indian ° Site of'a Major UK— US  
Ocean Security to Counter Piracy, Terrorism, Trafficking, and Chinese Influence. Military Base.  
1e Following 11 Sep 2001  
e Geopolitical Importance: Mauritius, “Star and Key of Indian Ocean,” becomes Strategic i Attacks, Base also served :  
Hotspot amid India—China Rivalry and Global Power Interests. as a CIA Interrogation  
Site.  
  
e Maritime Security Partner: Mauritius Strengthens India's Secure Indian Ocean Vision as  
  
Colombo Security Conclave Member with Sri Lanka, Maldives,  
  
and Bangladesh. Republic of Mauritius  
  
o India Enhances Maritime Security in Mauritius with e Island Nation located in Western Indian  
Agaléga Infrastructure, Coastal Radar Stations, and Ocean. i  
Integration into Information Fusion Centre—In dian Ocean i © Capital: Port Louis  
Region (Gurugram). i e PM: Navin Ramgoolam  
  
i e President: Dharam Gokhool  
i ¢ Currency: Mauritian Rupee  
  
i e National Day: March 12 (linked to Gandhi's  
Rapid Response in Indian Ocean Region. i Dandi March). H  
  
e Airspace Cooperation: India Upgrades Agaléga Island Airstrip  
into Full — Length Airfield, Boosting Strategic Presence and  
  
e Business and Economic Gateway to Africa: Mauritius, as African  
Continental Free Trade Area Member, Serves as Key Gateway for Indian Trade and Investment into Africa.  
  
India — Mauritius Partnership  
  
e Mauritius is a Former British and French Colony that gained  
  
independence from British Rule in 1968. SAGAR Initiative (Security and Growth for  
© Mahatma Gandhi's Visit to Mauritius (1901). Ail in the Regie —  
: ¢ Key Objectives: Ensure Maritime Security in }  
o Hosts Mahatma Gandhi Institute and World Hindi i Indian Ocean Region. i  
Secretariat. i o Promote Economic Growth and Blue i  
o Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture (1987): India's i Economy. i  
: o Build Capacity and Enhance Disaster }  
Largest Cultural Centre Abroad. i Me H  
i fanagement. :  
e Diplomatic Relation: Established in 1948. : o Protect Marine Resources and Combat }  
  
Ch Ch  
  
o India has backed Mauritius's Territorial Claim over Chagos  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 24  
  
\=== PAGE 27 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Archipelago, a matter of dispute with United Kingdom.  
e Bilateral Trade (FY 2024 —25): USD 887.25 Million  
  
o Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership MAHASAGAR  
  
Agreement (2021): 1“ such agreement between Indiaandan i e Launched by Indian Navy in 2023.  
  
African Nation. ie Stands for Maritime Heads for Active  
o Mauritius was 2™ Largest Source of FDI into India for FY Security And Growth for All in Region.  
  
2024 — 25, after Singapore. i e = Bi- Annual Initiative that convenes Naval }  
  
Chiefs and Maritime Officials from  
  
e India Served as 1“ Responder for Mauritius during COVID — 19, i  
Bangladesh, Comoros, Kenya, Madagascar, ;  
  
Wakashio Oil Spill (2020), Cyclone Chido.  
  
e — Mauritius participates in India — led VARUNA & MILAN Naval  
Drills.  
  
Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, :  
  
Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Tanzania. i  
  
ie Fosters a Collective Security Framework  
  
e Mauritius Confers Highest Civilian Honour, Grand Commander and Advances India's Indo — Pacific Vision. i  
  
of Order of Star and Key of Indian Ocean award, on Prime  
Minister Modi.  
  
MAHASAGAR Initiative  
  
MAHASAGAR stands for Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions.  
  
Expanded Framework building upon India's 2015 Maritime Doctrine SAGAR. i  
  
o While SAGAR primarily addressed India's Immediate Maritime Neighbourhood, MAHASAGAR widens  
scope to include broader Global South.  
  
Key Focus Areas: Trade for Development, Mutual Security, Technology Sharing, Financial Assistance.  
New Initiatives under MAHASAGAR i  
o IOS (Indian Ocean Ship) Sagar: A Platform (INS Sunayna) to deepen Naval Cooperation with Indian  
  
Ocean Littorals, focusing on Humanitarian Assistance, Disaster Relief, Joint Security Efforts.  
o AIKEYME (Africa—India Key Maritime Engagement): Large-scale Naval Exercise with African Nations.  
  
\= “AIKEYME” means Unity in Sanskrit, symbolizing Solidarity with 11 African Partners.  
  
Ws: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
\~\~ | S\&T and Space  
  
e ISRO's 1“ Indigenous Dust Experiment (DEX) detects Interplanetary Dust Near Earth, Marking Major Milestone in  
  
Space Instrumentation Capability.  
o ISRO's Dust Experiment deployed on PSLV — C58 POEM (PSLV Orbital Experimental Module), Developed by  
Physical Research Laboratory (Ahmedabad).  
  
e Pixxel — led Consortium (Piersight Space, Satsure Analytics India, Dhruva Space) signed Agreement with IN —- SPACe  
(Indian National Space Promotion and Authorisation Centre) to Build and Operate India's 1" Private National Earth  
Observation Satellite Constellation (12 Satellites).  
  
e Blue Origin unveils TeraWave Communications Network to Deploy Thousands of Satellites for Next-Gen Connectivity.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 25  
  
\=== PAGE 28 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
1\. Who criticized UK's plan to return Diego Garcia to Mauritius?  
(a) Joe Biden (b) Donald Trump (c) Barack Obama (d) UK Prime Minister  
  
2\. To which country did the UK agree to transfer sovereignty of the Chagos Islands?  
  
(a) India (b) Seychelles (c) Mauritius (d) Maldives  
3\. For how many years will the UK retain sovereign rights over Diego Garcia under the agreement?  
(a) 50 years (b) 75 years (c) 99 years (d) 125 years  
  
4\. When did the UK declare Chagos Islands as British Indian Ocean Territory?  
  
(a) 1960 (b) 1965 (c) 1968 (d) 1970  
5\. When did Mauritius gain independence from Britain?  
(a) 1965 (b) 1966 (c) 1968 (d) 1970  
6\. During which period were native Chagossians forcibly removed?  
(a) 1960-1965 (b) 1965-1970 (c) 1968-1973 (d) 1970-1975  
  
7\. When did Mauritius initiate legal proceedings against UK at the Permanent Court of Arbitration?  
(a) 2010 (b) 2012 (c) 2015 (d) 2017  
  
8\. Under which convention did the Permanent Court of Arbitration rule that UK violated Mauritius' rights?  
(a) Geneva Convention  
(b) Vienna Convention  
(c) United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)  
(d) Law of the Sea Treaty  
  
9\. When did the UK create a Marine Protected Area around Chagos Islands?  
(a) 2005 (b) 2008 (c) 2010 (d) 2012  
  
0\. | When did the UNGA vote on Mauritius' resolution to seek an ICJ Advisory Opinion?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2016 (c) 2017 (d) 2018  
  
1\. When did the International Court of Justice order UK to return Chagos Islands to Mauritius?  
(a) 2017 (b) 2018 (c) 2019 (d) 2020  
  
2\. | Which UN Resolution prohibits the breakup of colonies before independence?  
(a) Resolution 1314 (b) Resolution 1414  
(c) Resolution 1514 (d) Resolution 1614  
  
3\. What is Mauritius referred to as in terms of its strategic importance?  
(a) "Gateway of Indian Ocean" (b) "Star and Key of Indian Ocean"  
(c) "Pearl of Indian Ocean" (d) "Heart of Indian Ocean"  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 26  
  
\=== PAGE 29 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www.\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Which island's airstrip did India upgrade into a full-length airfield?  
(a) Rodrigues Island (b) Agaléga Island (c) Diego Garcia (d) Cargados Carajos  
  
Where is the Information Fusion Centre - Indian Ocean Region located?  
(a) New Delhi (b) Mumbai (c) Gurugram (d) Kochi  
  
Which countries are members of the Colombo Security Conclave along with Mauritius and India?  
(a) Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan (b) Sri Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh  
(c) Myanmar, Thailand, Indonesia (d) Seychelles, Madagascar, Comoros  
  
When did diplomatic relations between India and Mauritius establish?  
(a) 1947 (b) 1948 (c) 1950 (d) 1968  
  
When did Mahatma Gandhi visit Mauritius?  
(a) 1895 (b) 1901 (c) 1910 (d) 1915  
  
When was the Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture established in Mauritius?  
(a) 1980 (b) 1984 (c) 1987 (d) 1990  
  
When was the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement signed between India and  
Mauritius?  
(a) 2019 (b) 2020 (c) 2021 (d) 2022  
  
Dear Lpt’ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic and valuable material by putting in lot  
of time, effort, energy and money to make you successful and it would not  
be fair ifsomeone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
And they will create competition for you-without being the part of Law  
prep. To prevent this unfair activ gilant and inform us if you find  
  
anybody ying (in any form) it or  
  
Unauthoris of Law Prep ma  
punishable b sonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
Copyright Act of 1957.  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
‘compliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 27  
  
\=== PAGE 30 ===  
{\_-S, January 2026  
  
{is TOPIC  
. “inNEWS  
  
UAE — SAUDI  
RIFT IN YEMEN  
  
Why in News?  
  
UAE Pulls Troops from Saudi Arabia following Saudi Airstrikes on Yemen's Mukalla Port.  
  
Move Highlights Divisions in Anti—Houthi Coalition, Complicating Prospects for Unified Peace Process in Yemen  
Also, United Arab Emirates President Abu Dhabi Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan visited India.  
  
Cliffs Notes /  
  
66  
  
Transitional Council (STC) in southern Yemen, with strikes reported in the Hadramout region. The action came  
  
Saudi military aircraft carried out air operations against units of the UAE-supported Southern  
  
after Saudi-aligned National Shield Forces sought to assume control of STC military installations, a move that  
the STC strongly opposed.  
  
As part of efforts to contain rising tensions, Riyadh called for the withdrawal of STC fighters from the  
contested areas. However, the separatist group declined to comply, leading to a further deterioration in  
relations. The standoff intensified amid the STC's recent territorial expansion into Hadramout and  
Mahra—strategically sensitive provinces bordering Saudi Arabia and critical to regional security and energy  
transit corridors.  
  
This development underscores deepening fault lines between Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates  
within the broader anti-Houthi coalition, despite their shared opposition to the Iran-backed Houthi movement.  
Saudi officials described the airstrikes as a preventive and limited intervention aimed at averting wider  
  
instability rather than escalating the conflict.  
  
Mukalla Port Incident  
  
e — Airstrike at Mukalla: Saudi Arabia carried out Airstrikes on Mukalla Port in Southern Yemen.  
o. Strike followed Arrival of a Consignment from Fujairah (UAE), which Riyadh alleged Contained Arms meant for  
Southern Separatist Groups.  
e UAE's Response: Abu Dhabi rejected Allegation, clarifying that Shipment consisted of Vehicles meant Exclusively for UAE  
Forces.  
  
o Ittermed Claims of Arms Transfer to Separatists as Unfounded.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 28  
  
\=== PAGE 31 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Who controls which area  
in Yemen?  
  
Riyadh  
  
At the request of the Republic of Yemen,  
  
Saudi Arabia called on the United Arab  
  
Emirates to withdraw its military elements  
  
\_ from Yemeni territory within 24 hours and to  
refrain from providing any military or  
financial support to any party in the country  
  
™ Saudi Arabia and coalition backed  
Yemeni government  
  
™© Iran backed Houthis  
  
' UAE backed Southern Transitional  
Council forces  
  
@® Republican Guards backed by the  
  
nephew of Yemen's ousted leader  
  
SAUDI  
ARABIA  
  
SOMALIA  
  
Southern Transitional Council: Backed by UAE.  
  
fe}  
fe}  
  
o Closely aligned with Hadramout Tribal Alliance.  
  
Receives Political and Strategic Backing from Saudi Arabia.  
  
fe}  
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
AT,  
7  
  
Do  
  
UAE  
  
UAE-backed Southern  
Transitional Council  
  
controls southern and  
  
eastern Yemen, the Houthis  
control the north and west,  
while the internationally j  
recognized government \_ ow)  
controls only limited areas  
  
in the north  
  
Advocates Autonomy or Independence for Southern Yemen since 2017.  
Has recently expanded influence in regions such as Hadramout and Mahra.  
  
Pro—Government Military Bloc: Opposes STC's Separatist Agenda.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@  
  
29  
  
\=== PAGE 32 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
L  
  
IL.  
  
Wi.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Reasons Cited for UAE Troop Withdrawal  
  
Security Concerns: Escalating Airstrikes raised risks to UAE Personnel stationed in the region.  
  
Limited Mandate in Yemen: UAE reiterated that its Military Presence is confined to Counter — Terrorism Operations, Not  
Broader Political or Factional Conflicts.  
  
Political Messaging: Move signals Abu Dhabi's Stance that Yemen's Future Political Structure should be determined  
internally by Yemenis themselves.  
  
Location: South— Western Arabian Peninsula  
Borders Saudi Arabia and Oman, flanked by Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.  
Strategic Importance: Proximity to Bab—el—Mandeb Strait, a Crucial Global Maritime Chokepoint.  
  
Capital: Sana (Currently under Houthi Control)  
o Civil War began in 2014 after Houthi Rebels captured Sana'a; Saudi-—led Intervention started in 2015.  
  
President: Rashad al—Alimi  
  
Prime Minister: Shaea al—Zindani  
  
Yemen's Internal Divisions  
  
Historical Roots of Division  
  
e \~=North — South Cultural and Political Divide: Yemen has  
  
long been divided by Distinct Religious Traditions, Social Militant and Insurgent Actors  
Structures and Governance Systems between The North =} ¢ Al — Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula: AQAP  
and The South. i and its affiliate Ansar al — Sharia exploited  
  
o These differences were reinforced by Foreign eak Governance . .  
o They captured and controlled territory in  
  
Influence and Colonial Legacies, particularly in Southern and Eastern Yemen at various points.  
  
Southern Yemen. e¢ Houthi Movement: Originating among Zaydi  
Shia Population of Northern Yemen, Houthis  
  
emerged as a powerful Political — Military  
  
e Legacy of Cold War — era States: Until 1990, Yemen  
  
existed as Two Separate Countries.  
. . Force.  
o Yemeni Arab Republic (North Yemen): Supported  
  
by United States and Saudi Arabia.  
  
o People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen): Backed by Soviet Union.  
Unification and Its Aftermath  
e In 1990, Two States merged to form Republic of Yemen.  
e \~=AliAbdullah Saleh, who had governed North Yemen since 1978, became President of Unified State.  
  
e — Political Power after unification remained heavily centralised, creating resentment in South.  
  
Southern Separatism  
e By 1994, Southern Leaders attempted Secession, leading to a brief Civil Conflict.  
  
e Southern Discontent resurfaced in 2007 with formation of Southern Movement (Al-Hirak).  
  
o Movement continues to demand Greater Autonomy or Independence for Southern Yemen.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 30  
  
\=== PAGE 33 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Houthi Insurgency  
  
Saade Wars (2004 — 2010): Death of their founder, “Hussein al Houthi”, by “Yemeni Forces” in “Saada” in “2004” sparked  
  
the “Houthi Insurgency”.  
  
2011 Yemen Uprising forced President Ali Abdullah Saleh to Transfer Power to his Deputy Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi.  
  
o New Yemeni President struggles with Economic Crisis and Rising Jihadist (Al-Qaeda in Arabian Peninsula) Security  
Threats.  
  
o Yemen's Armed Forces remained Largely Loyal to Ousted President, Undermining Authority of New President Hadi.  
  
Arab Spring & Houthi Takeover: Houthis seized Saada and captured Sanaa in 2014, Forcing President Hadi to Flee Abroad in  
  
2015, and ignited a Civil War.  
  
o They expanded their control in Western Yemen including “Bab al Mandeb Strait”, a critical passage to Red Sea in  
“2015”.  
  
Saudi-led Intervention (2015 — Present): Group's Takeover led to “Saudi Arabia's Military Intervention” to reinstate  
  
“Internationally Recognized Government”.  
  
o Tension Escalation & Killing of Saleh: In “2017”, “Houthis” claimed responsibility for a Missile Attack on “Riyadh's  
King Khalid International Airport” and later killed “Saleh” for switching allegiances to the “Saudi-led Coalition”.  
  
Who are Houthis?  
Officially known as “Ansar Allah”, emerged from Yemen in the 1990s.  
Group primarily composed of “Zaidi Shia Muslims” and “Members of Houthi Tribe”  
  
Founder: Zaidi Religious Leader “Hussein al-Houthi”  
Current Leader: Abdul-Malik al-Houthi  
  
Houthis emerged as an “Opposition Movement” to Yemen President “Ali Abdullah Saleh” in 2000s.  
  
Accused of Corruption and being backed by “Saudi Arabia” and the ‘United States”.  
  
Key Outcomes of UAE's President Visit  
  
Bilateral Trade Target: India and UAE agreed to Double Bilateral Trade to over USD 200 Billion by 2032.  
  
Economic & Investment Initiatives: Promotion of New Trade Corridors and Platforms such as Bharat Mart, Virtual Trade  
Corridor, Bharat— Africa Setu.  
  
Civil Nuclear Cooperation: Both Countries agreed to explore cooperation in Advanced Nuclear Technologies, Small  
Modular Reactors, Nuclear Safety Frameworks.  
  
o This follows India's enactment of SHANTI Act 2025, enabling broader international nuclear collaboration.  
  
Strategic Defence Partnership: Framework agreed for enhanced Cooperation in Defence Technology, Military Training,  
Cyber and Emerging Security Domains.  
  
Long-term LNG Supply Agreement: ADNOC Gas signed a Sales and Purchase Agreement with HPCL.  
  
o Supply of 0.5 Million Tonnes Per Annum of LNG for 10 Years.  
  
Digital / Data Embassies: Proposal to establish Offshore Digital Infrastructure where a Country stores Critical National Data.  
  
o Purpose Ensuring Data Sovereignty and Protection against Cyberattacks, Natural Disasters, and Geopolitical  
  
Disruptions  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 31  
  
\=== PAGE 34 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
o In 2017, Estonia launched World's 1st Data Embassy in Luxembourg. Monaco followed, establishing its Own Data  
  
Embassy in Luxembourg in 2021.  
  
e AI & Emerging Technologies: Cooperation to set up a Supercomputing Cluster under India's AI India Mission, enhancing  
joint capabilities in Artificial Intelligence, High— Performance Computing, Advanced Research Ecosystems.  
  
India — UAE Bilateral Relations  
  
e FY 2024 — 25: US$ 100 Billion  
e 3" Largest Trade Partner after China and US.  
Trade e 2" Largest Export Destination of India, after US.  
e 4th Largest Crude Oil Source and a Major Supplier of Crude Oil, LNG and  
LPG  
  
In 2022, India became 1“ Country with which UAE signed Comprehensive  
Economic Partnership Agreement  
  
Comprehensive Economic Partnership  
Agreement  
  
UAE accounted for 18% of India's Remittance Flows.  
  
NRI Remittances  
  
e¢ Desert Cyclone (Military), Zayed Talwar (Naval) and Desert Eagle (Air  
  
Defence Force)  
e India’s access to UAE’s Al Dhafra Air Base for Refuelling.  
  
Multilateral Cooperation \* 12U2 (India \~ Israel \~ UAE \~ USA)  
e =BRICS  
¢ MoU for Cooperation aimed at supporting of "Maritime Heritage Complex"  
  
Cultural at Wuidttl (Gujarat) \\ .  
e BAPS Hindu Temple: UAE’s 1° Traditional Hindu Stone Temple located in  
  
Abu Dhabi.  
  
; United Arab Emirates ; The Kafala System  
  
i e Federal, Elective Monarchy i The Kafala system, meaning  
  
H composed of 7 Emirates H "sponsorship" in Arabic, is used in Gulf  
  
i . H countries like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,  
  
ie = Shares Land Borders with Oman | Bahiains Qatan;Oman arid the UAE  
  
H and Saudi Arabia. i : é :  
  
o Maritime Borders in Persian i  
Gulf with Qatar and Iran & with i  
  
H Oman in Gulf of Oman. H have an in-country sponsor, typically their  
ie President: Mohammed bin Zayed i employer.  
  
i Al Nahyan i This sponsor controls the worker's visa  
ie Prime Minister: Mohammed bin H and legal status. Workers cannot change  
  
H Rashid Al Maktoum i jobs or leave the country without the  
  
ie Currency: Dirham  
ie Capital: Abu Dhabi  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
Kafala regulates the relationship  
between employers and migrant  
workers, requiring foreign workers to  
  
sponsor's permission, leading to  
potential exploitation, non-payment of  
wages, poor working conditions, and  
restricted freedom of movement.  
  
32  
  
\=== PAGE 35 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Extra Shorts  
  
Arab World's I" Nuclear Power Plant: Barakah Nuclear Power Plant  
BAPS Hindu Temple: 1" Hindu Stone Temple Abu Dhabi (UAE)  
Awarded Highest Civilian Award of UAE called 'Order of Zayed in 2019.  
  
World's Largest Airport Terminal: Al Maktoum International Airport (Jebel Ali, Dubai, UAE).  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Skill — Up: GCC, Persian Gulf, Strait of Hormuz, Arab League, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, Axis of Resistance  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FollowusNow B@O@  
  
33  
  
\=== PAGE 36 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations andNews ROE  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Which port in Yemen did Saudi Arabia carry out airstrikes on?  
(a) Aden Port (b) Hodeidah Port (c) Mukalla Port (d) Mocha Port  
  
From which UAE city did the controversial consignment arrive at Mukalla Port?  
(a) Dubai (b) Abu Dhabi (c) Sharjah (d) Fujairah  
  
What did Saudi Arabia allege the consignment contained?  
(a) Humanitarian aid (b) Arms meant for Southern Separatist Groups  
(c) Commercial goods (d) Medical supplies  
  
What did UAE claim the shipment actually contained?  
(a) Food supplies (b) Medical equipment  
(c) Vehicles meant exclusively for UAE Forces (d) Construction materials  
  
What is UAE's stated mandate in Yemen?  
(a) Nation building (b) Counter-Terrorism Operations  
  
(c) Political mediation (d) Humanitarian assistance  
  
What were the two separate countries that existed in Yemen until 1990?  
  
(a) North Yemen and East Yemen  
  
(b) Yemeni Arab Republic (North) and People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South)  
(c) Kingdom of Yemen and Republic of Yemen  
  
(d) Upper Yemen and Lower Yemen  
  
Which country supported North Yemen during the Cold War?  
(a) Soviet Union (b) China  
(c) United States and Saudi Arabia (d) United Kingdom  
  
Which country backed South Yemen during the Cold War?  
(a) United States (b) Soviet Union (c) China (d) France  
  
When did the two Yemeni states merge to form the Republic of Yemen?  
(a) 1985 (b) 1988 (c) 1990 (d) 1992  
  
Who became the President of unified Yemen in 1990?  
(a) Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi (b) Ali Abdullah Saleh  
(c) Hussein al Houthi (d) Abd Rabbuh Mansur  
  
Since when had Ali Abdullah Saleh governed North Yemen?  
(a) 1970 (b) 1975 (c) 1978 (d) 1982  
  
When did Southern Leaders attempt secession, leading to a brief Civil Conflict?  
(a) 1992 (b) 1993 (c) 1994 (d) 1995  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 34  
  
\=== PAGE 37 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
3\. | When was the Southern Movement (Al-Hirak) formed?  
(a) 2004 (b) 2005 (c) 2007 (d) 2009  
  
4\. | What were the conflicts between 2004-2010 called that sparked the Houthi Insurgency?  
(a) Yemen Wars (b) Saada Wars (c) North Wars (d) Tribal Wars  
  
5\. | Who was the founder of the Houthi movement killed in 2004?  
(a) Ali Abdullah Saleh (b) Hussein al Houthi  
(c) Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi (d) Abdul-Malik al-Houthi  
  
6\. To whom did Ali Abdullah Saleh transfer power after the 2011 Yemen Uprising?  
(a) Hussein al Houthi (b) A Southern leader  
(c) Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi (d) A Saudi-backed candidate  
  
7\. When did Houthis capture Sanaa and force President Hadi to flee?  
(a) 2013 (b) 2014-2015 (c) 2016 (d) 2017  
  
8\. | Which strategic strait did Houthis gain control over in 2015?  
(a) Strait of Hormuz (b) Strait of Gibraltar  
(c) Bab al Mandeb Strait (d) Strait of Malacca  
  
9\. In which year did Houthis claim responsibility for a missile attack on Riyadh's King Khalid International Airport?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2016 (c) 2017 (d) 2018  
  
20\. Who did the Houthis kill in 2017 for switching allegiances to the Saudi-led Coalition?  
(a) President Hadi (b) Ali Abdullah Saleh (c) Hussein al Houthi (d) A tribal leader  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 35  
  
\=== PAGE 38 ===  
/\_", January 2026  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
77” REPUBLIC  
DAY 2026  
  
Why in News?  
India marked Republic Day on 26 January annually to honour 1950 Adoption of Its Constitution, Establishing a  
Sovereign Democratic Republic.  
Republic Day Parade showcased Constitutional Values through 30 Cultural Tableaux under “Swatantrata ka Mantra —  
Vande Mataram and Samriddhi ka Mantra—Atmanirbhar Bharat” Sub—Themes.  
  
Chronology of Events  
  
Pre — Parade Events  
  
o Commencement of Celebrations: Republic Day festivities officially begin on 23" Jan, observed as  
Parakram Divas in honour of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose's Birth Anniversary.  
  
o President's Address to Nation: On the Day Preceding Republic Day, President of India delivers  
Republic Day Address.  
  
o Wreath — Laying at Amar Jawan Jyoti: In early morning of 26" Jan, Prime Minister pays homage at  
Amar Jawan. Jyoti War Memorial  
  
o National Flag Unfurling: President unfurls National Flag at Kartavya Path (formerly Rajpath), followed  
by National Anthem and a 21 — Gun Salute, marking Formal Start of Parade.  
  
Post — Parade Events  
  
o. Presentation of Awards: In evening, President confers Padma Awards and Gallantry Awards.  
o Beating Retreat Ceremony: Republic Day celebrations conclude on 29" Jan at Vijay Chowk with  
Beating Retreat Ceremony.  
  
Republic Day of India 2026  
  
¢ India is commemorating its 77" Republic Day on Jan 26, 2026.  
  
e Parade Location: Kartavya Path (formerly Rajpath), New Delhi  
  
e Themes 2026: “150 Years of Vande Mataram”  
  
e Chief Guest: Ursula von der Leyen (President of European Commission) and Antonio Costa (President of European Council)  
o Chief Guest of 1“ Republic Day Parade in 1950 was President Sukarno of Indonesia.  
  
o Indonesian President Prabowo Subianto has been invited as Chief Guest for India's Republic Day celebrations in 2025.  
  
e Padma Awards 2026 Announced: 131 Honours Conferred, including 5 Padma Vibhushan, 13 Padma Bhushan and 113 Padma  
Shri.  
  
o 5 Padma Vibhushan: Dharmendra Singh Deol (Posthumous | Film Actor), Justice (Retd) K.T. Thomas (Public Affairs),  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 36  
  
\=== PAGE 39 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
N. Rajam (Classical Musician), P. Narayanan (Literature and Education), V.S. Achuthanandhan (Posthumous | Public  
Affairs).  
Awards honours include 19 Women, 6 Foreign/NRI/PIO/OCI Recipients, 16 Posthumous Awardees and 2 Duo  
  
Honourees.  
  
e Gallantry Awards conferred on 70 Armed Forces Personnel.  
  
O°  
  
Shubhanshu Shukla, 1" Indian on ISS, honoured with Ashok Chakra, India's Highest Peacetime Gallantry Award.  
  
¢ Republic Day Parade showcased Top Tableaux: Maharashtra (Ganeshotsav: A Symbol of Aatmanirbharta), Jammu &  
  
Kashmir (Handicrafts and Folk Dances of Jammu & Kashmir) and Kerala  
  
e¢ Republic Day commemorates Enactment of Constitution of  
India on 26" Jan 1950 and India's transition to a Republic  
which came into effect on 26" Jan 1950.  
  
¢ Constitution was adopted by Constituent Assembly of India  
on 26"s Nov 1949 and came into effect on 26" Jan 1950.  
  
fe)  
  
History of Republic Day  
  
Constitution of India repealed Indian Independence Act  
1947 and Government of India Act 1935 when it became  
effective on 26th Jan 1950.  
  
India ceased to be a Dominion of British Crown and  
became a Sovereign, Democratic Republic with a  
Constitution.  
  
e Lahore Session of INC in Dec 1929 passed historic "Poorna Swaraj" resolution, calling for Total Self - Rule /  
  
Sovereignty and Complete Independence from British Rule.  
  
fe)  
  
fe)  
  
Declaration of Independence was officially promulgated on 26" Jan 1930, and Congress urged Indians to celebrate  
“Independence" on that day.  
  
From 1930 to 1947, "26" Jan" was celebrated as "Independence Day" or "Poorna Swaraj Day."  
  
¢ India gained independence on 15" Aug 1947, leading to a re-evaluation of significance of Republic Day.  
  
fe)  
  
Selection of 26" Jan for promulgation of India's New Constitution was ideal due to its Existing Nationalist  
  
Significance and alignment with "Poorna Swaraj" declaration.  
  
Extra Shots  
On Republic Day, every year, President of India, who is Head of State, "Unfurls" Tricolour.  
o While on Independence Day (Aug 15), Prime Minister, who heads Union Government, "Hoists" National  
Flag.  
On 26" Jan, Flag is Folded or Rolled, and attached to Top of a Pole.  
o It is then Unveiled (Unfurled) by President, who does so without pulling it up.  
  
\= "Unfurling" is a Symbolic Gesture to Renew Commitment to Principles laid down in the Constitution,  
highlighting India's shift from being a British Colony to becoming a Sovereign, Democratic Republic.  
  
On 15" Aug; Flag, positioned at Bottom of Pole, is Raised (Hoisted) by Prime Minister, from Bottom to Top.  
o Hoisting symbolises Rise of a New Nation; Patriotism and Freedom from Colonial Rule.  
  
26" Nov is observedas Constitution Day, since 2015.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 37  
  
\=== PAGE 40 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www \_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
sCIMILTANZAND.GALLANTR  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
Wi CIVILIAN AWARDS  
  
Bharat Ratna Padma Awards  
eee  
© India’s highest civilian award; instituted in 1954 P © Instituted in 1954; announced annually on eve of Republic Day  
  
© Awarded for exceptional service/performance of  
the highest order in any field of human endeavour  
\_\_° Award includes certificate & medallion  
(no monetary grant)  
© Recommended to President by the PM  
© Can be given (max) thrice per year  
  
© Recognises achievements in all fields/disciplines involving public service  
© Categories: Padma Vibhushan \> Padma Bhushan \> Padma Shri  
  
MN GALLANTRY AWARDS  
  
© Wartime Gallantry instituted on 26” January 1950 © Eligibility -  
© Peacetime Gallantry instituted on 4° January 1952  
© Announced twice a year - Republic Day and Independence Day  
  
All officers of all ranks (Army, Navy, IAF), Reserve  
  
forces, Territorial army  
  
© Order of Precedence - Param Vir Chakra \> Ashoka Chakra \> Mahavir People providing nursing services under any  
Chakra \> Kirti Chakra \> Vir Chakra \> Shaurya Chakra of the above forces  
  
Peacetime  
Gallantry Awards  
  
Ashoka Chakra KirtiChakra Shaurya Chakra  
  
“Param Maha  
Vir Chakra Vir Chakra “chakra  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 38  
  
\=== PAGE 41 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
What is the theme for India’s Republic Day 2025?  
(a) Bharat ki Pragati A New Dawn (b) Swarnim Bharat — Virasat aur Vikas  
(c) Ek Bharat — Shreshtha Bharat (d) Bharat ka Uday — The Rise of India  
  
Who has been invited as the Chief Guest for India’s Republic Day celebrations in 2025?  
(a) President of France (b) President of Indonesia  
(c) President of the United States (d) Prime Minister of Japan  
  
Who was the Chief Guest at India’s first Republic Day Parade in 1950?  
(a) King of Nepal (b) President Sukarno of Indonesia  
(c) Queen Elizabeth II (d) President Dwight D. Eisenhower of the United States  
  
On which date did India officially adopt its Constitution and become a Republic?  
(a) August 15, 1947 (b) January 26, 1950  
(c) October 2, 1947 (d) November 14, 1949  
  
When do the Republic Day celebrations begin in 2025?  
(a) 15th January (b) 23rd January (c) 26th January (d) 1st February  
  
What is Bharat Parv at Red Fort known for?  
  
(a) Political speeches by leaders  
  
(b) Cultural performances, handicraft exhibitions, and culinary delights  
(c) Military parades  
  
(d) Scientific innovations and exhibitions  
  
What is the purpose of the Veer Gatha 4.0 competition?  
  
(a) To celebrate India’s technological achievements  
  
(b) To encourage students to write about gallantry award recipients and freedom fighters  
(c) To showcase traditional dance and music  
  
(d) To commemorate the victory of India in wars  
  
Who jointly launched the Veer Gatha 4.0 competition?  
  
(a) Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Tourism  
  
(b) Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Education  
  
(c) Ministry of Youth Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs  
(d) Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Finance  
  
What event marks the culmination of the 76th Republic Day celebrations in 2025?  
(a) Flag hoisting ceremony (b) Beating Retreat Ceremony  
(c) Military parade at India Gate (d) Cultural performances at Red Fort  
  
When was the Constitution of India adopted by the Constituent Assembly?  
(a) 15th August 1947 (b) 26th January 1950  
(c) 26th November 1949 (d) 15th August 1948  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 39  
  
\=== PAGE 42 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
13\.  
  
15\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
On which date did the Lahore Session of the Indian National Congress (INC) pass the historic "Poorna Swaraj"  
resolution?  
(a) 15th August 1947 (b) 26th January 1930 (c) 26th November 1949 (d) 15th August 1942  
  
What was the status of India before 26th January 1950 under British rule?  
(a) India was a sovereign, democratic republic (b) India was a British colony with no legal framework  
  
(c) India was a Dominion of the British Crown (d) India was a part of the Commonwealth with autonomy  
  
On Republic Day, who unfurls the Tricolour?  
(a) Prime Minister (b) President of India (c) Chief Justice of India (d) Vice President of India  
  
On which day does the Prime Minister of India hoist the National Flag?  
(a) Republic Day (26th January) (b) Independence Day (15th August)  
(c) Constitution Day (26th November) (d) Gandhi Jayanti (2nd October)  
  
Constitution Day is observed on which date?  
(a) 24th November (b) 25th November (c) 26th November (d) 27th November  
  
Dear Lpt’ ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic and valuable material by putting in lot  
of time, effort, energy and money to make you successful and it would not  
be fair ifsomeone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
And they will create competition for you without being the part of Law  
  
ep. To prevent this unfair ac be vigilant and inform us if you find  
anybody copying (in any form) it or teaching from it.  
  
Law Prep material is illegal and  
punishable by imprisonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
Copyright Act of 1957.  
  
to be in touch for  
plaints/compliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 40  
  
\=== PAGE 43 ===  
(\> January 2026  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
TPROMOTION sa  
  
EQUITYIN, hv  
(ER EDUCATION " Tab  
  
ULATIONS oe aS  
  
‘urpotiesvout  
  
UGC (PROMOTION  
OF EQUITY IN HIGHER  
EDUCATION  
INSTITUTIONS)  
REGULATIONS, 2026  
  
Why in News?  
  
University Grants Commission notified Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions Regulations (2026) to  
  
Promote Equity, Inclusion and Anti— Discrimination in Indian Higher Education Institutions.  
  
Supreme Court Temporarily Stays UGC 2026 Equity Regulations, citing Constitutional and Social Concerns.  
  
University Grants Commission  
  
e Type: Statutory Body (UGC Act 1956)  
e Formally inaugurated in 1953 by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.  
o Idea was evolved from Sargeant Report (1944).  
\= University Grants Committee, established in 1945, expanded by 1947 to Oversee All Indian Universities.  
o University Education Commission (1948), chaired by Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, recommended Restructuring UGC on  
British Model.  
o In 1952, Union Government entrusts University Grants Commission with Oversight of Higher Education Grants  
¢ Responsible for Coordination, Funding and Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education.  
  
e Key Functions: Allocating Grants to Universities and Colleges, Advising Government on Higher Education Reforms,  
Maintaining Academic Standards across Institutions.  
  
e Composition: Chairman (Vineet Joshi), Vice-Chairman and 10 Members appointed by Central Government.  
  
e HQ: New Delhi.  
  
Status of Discrimination in Indian Universities |  
  
e Rising Complaints: UGC Reports 118% Rise in Caste-Discrimination Complaints, From 173 in 2019-20 to 378 in 2023-24.  
  
e Pending Cases: Pending Caste — Discrimination Cases at UGC Rise from 18 in 2019-20 to 108 in 2023-24 Despite High  
Disposal Rates.  
  
e High-Profile Cases: Rohith Vemula (2016) and Payal Tadvi (2019) Cases Spotlight Alleged Institutional Caste Exclusion  
Nationwide  
  
Impact of Caste — based Discrimination in Higher Education  
  
{e \~ Caste Discrimination in Education erodes Equality, Dignity and Fraternity, undermining Trust in Democratic }  
Institutions.  
Caste Bias and Poor Schooling limit SC/ST/OBC Access to Elite Institutions, hindering Social Mobility.  
  
Marginalised Communities face Higher Dropout Rates due to Academic, Financial and Psychological Pressures.  
  
Reserved Category Stigma leads to Psychological Exclusion, Anxiety Low Self — Esteem and Poor Academic  
Outcomes.  
  
SC/ST Cells in Universities often Lack Autonomy and Enforcement, Weakening Grievance Redressal Mechanisms s.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 4l  
  
\=== PAGE 44 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs January 2026\_NationalNewsandIssues  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Key Provisions of UGC Rules 2026  
  
e Broad Definition of Discrimination: Regulations define Caste —  
  
based Discrimination to include Unfair or Biased Treatment  
  
Objectives of UGC Rules 2026  
  
\!e Promote Equity, Fairness and Inclusion in }  
  
against SCs, STs and OBCs in Higher Education Institutions.  
  
o Includes Direct, Indirect, Systemic Discrimination and Higher Education.  
  
Acts undermining Human Dignity or Equality in|} e Prevent Discrimination on Campuses based  
Education. i on Caste, Religion, Gender, Race, Disability i  
  
i or Place of Birth. i  
e Ensure a Safe and Inclusive Environment for  
: Students, Faculty and Staff: }  
  
i e = Mandate Institutional Accountability and }  
  
e Equal Opportunity Centres: Nodal Body for Promoting Equity  
and Inclusion on campus.  
  
o © Mandatory in All Higher Education Institutions.  
  
o Functions: Promote Equity and Social Inclusion, Receive  
  
Monitoring Mechanisms  
  
and Address Discrimination Complaints, Create a  
Conducive and Inclusive Campus Environment, Sensitise Stakeholders on Equity, Inclusion and Anti — Discrimination  
e Equity Committee under EOCs: Head of Institution as Chairperson  
o Other Members 3 Senior Faculty, 1 Non — Teaching Staff, 2 Civil Society Representatives, 2 Student Representatives,  
Coordinator of EOC as Member Secretary  
o Representation Requirements: SC, ST, OBC, Women and Persons with Disabilities  
o Equity Committee is required to convene within 24 Hours of receiving a complaint and complete inquiry process by  
submitting its report within 15 Working Days.  
e Ombudsperson: Independent Authority for Appeals Against Unresolved Equity Grievances within 30 Days.  
o Decisions are Binding on Institutions.  
e Reporting and Compliance: EOCs submit Bi— Annual Reports and Institutions submit Annual Equity Compliance reports to  
UGC.  
  
o National Monitoring Committee oversees Compliance, meets at least twice a year.  
  
e Accountability and Penalties: Heads of Institutions held responsible for Compliance.  
  
o Non-Compliance can lead to Debarment from UGC Schemes, Restrictions on Offering Degrees, Withdrawal of UGC  
Recognition  
Reasons for Opposition to the Regulations  
  
e Demographic Policing Concerns: Critics fear that Regulatory Framework could indirectly influence Social and  
i Demographic Composition of Educational Campuses, potentially affecting Diversity and Inclusion. H  
e Absence of Safeguards: There is No Explicit Protection for Individuals against False, Frivolous or Malicious  
} Complaints, raising concerns about Misuse. i  
e Risk of Reputational Damage: Regulations Lack Mechanisms to maintain Confidentiality or provide Timely  
i Redress for those Accused, leaving reputations vulnerable during investigations.  
  
© Compressed Timelines: Short Inquiry Periods may compromise thoroughness of Fact — Finding, increasing  
i Risk of Errors in Decision— Making. i  
© = Criminal Escalation Risk: Helpline's Automatic Linkage to Police Authorities may discourage Open Academic |  
Discourse and Reporting, as Students and Faculty could fear Criminal Consequence.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 42  
  
\=== PAGE 45 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
Legal and Constitutional Safeguards Against Caste Discrimination  
  
e = Article 14: Equality Before Law  
  
° Article 15: Prohibition of Discrimination; Allows Affirmative Action  
  
e — Article 16: Equal Opportunity in Public Employment  
  
e Article 17: Abolition of Untouchability  
  
e Article 46: Promote Educational/Economic Interests of Weaker Sections  
  
e Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955: Imposes Penalties for Practising Untouchability and Denying Civil Rights.  
  
e SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989: Enforces Strict Punishments to Prevent Exploitation of Scheduled Castes  
and Tribes.  
  
e — Right to Education Act, 2009: Ensures Inclusive and Non — Discriminatory Access to Education across India.  
  
Skill — Up: Reservation in India, EWS, NHRC  
  
Dear Lpt’ ians  
We create most inventive; authentic and valuable material by putting in lot  
of time, effort, energy and money to make you successful and it would not  
  
be fair ifsomeone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
And they will create competition for you without being the part of Law  
  
prep. To,prevent this unfair activity, be vigilant and inform us if you find  
  
anybody copying (in any form) it or teaching from it.  
  
ze of Law Prep material is illegal and  
punishable by imprisonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
Copyright Act of 1957.  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
suggestions/feedback/complaints/compliments, at: 94141 43  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 43  
  
\=== PAGE 46 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
What is the official name of the regulations notified by UGC?  
  
(a) UGC Anti-Discrimination Rules 2026  
  
(b) UGC Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions Regulations 2026  
(c) UGC Social Justice in Education Regulations 2026  
  
(d) UGC Caste Equity Rules 2026  
  
What action did the Supreme Court take regarding the UGC 2026 Equity Regulations?  
(a) Approved them (b) Rejected them permanently  
(c) Temporarily stayed them (d) Modified them  
  
Under which act is UGC established as a statutory body?  
(a) UGC Act 1952 (b) UGC Act 1954 (c) UGC Act 1956 (d) UGC Act 1958  
  
When was UGC formally inaugurated?  
(a) 1950 (b) 1952 (c) 1953 (d) 1956  
  
Who formally inaugurated the UGC?  
(a) Jawaharlal Nehru (b) Dr. S. Radhakrishnan  
(c) Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (d) Rajendra Prasad  
  
From which report did the idea of UGC evolve?  
(a) Kothari Commission Report (b) Radhakrishnan Commission Report  
(c) Sargeant Report (d) Mudaliar Commission Report  
  
Who chaired the University Education Commission (1948)?  
(a) Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (b) Dr. S. Radhakrishnan  
(c) Sargeant (d) C. Rajagopalachari  
  
On which model did the University Education Commission recommend restructuring UGC?  
(a) American Model (b) German Model (c) British Model (d) French Model  
  
Who is the current Chairman of UGC?  
(a) M. Jagadesh Kumar (b) Vineet Joshi (c) D.P. Singh (d) Ved Prakash  
  
Where is the headquarters of UGC located?  
(a) Mumbai (b) Kolkata (c) New Delhi (d) Bangalore  
  
What was the percentage rise in caste-discrimination complaints reported by UGC?  
(a) 98% (b) 108% (c) 118% (d) 128%  
  
How many caste-discrimination complaints were received in 2019-20?  
(a) 153 (b) 163 (c) 173 (d) 183  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 44  
  
\=== PAGE 47 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
How many caste-discrimination complaints were received in 2023-24?  
(a) 348 (b) 368 (c) 378 (d) 388  
  
How many pending caste-discrimination cases were there in 2023-24?  
(a) 88 (b) 98 (c) 108 (d) 118  
  
Which high-profile case occurred in 2016 highlighting alleged institutional caste exclusion?  
  
(a) Payal Tadvi (b) Rohith Vemula (c) Both (a) and (b) (d) Neither  
What does EOC stand for?  
  
(a) Equal Opportunity Commission (b) Equal Opportunity Centre  
  
(c) Equity and Opportunity Council (d) Educational Opportunity Committee  
  
Who serves as the Chairperson of the Equity Committee under EOCs?  
(a) UGC Chairman (b) Senior Faculty Member  
(c) Head of Institution (d) Student Representative  
  
Within how many hours must the Equity Committee convene after receiving a complaint?  
(a) 12 hours (b) 24 hours (c) 48 hours (d) 72 hours  
  
Within how many working days must the Equity Committee complete its inquiry and submit a report?  
(a) 10 working days (b) 15 working days (c) 20 working days (d) 30 working days  
  
Within how many days can appeals be made to the Ombudsperson?  
(a) 15 days (b) 20 days (c) 30 days (d) 45 days  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 45  
  
\=== PAGE 48 ===  
i os, January 2026  
  
{is TOPIC  
. “inNEWS  
  
10 YEARS OF  
STARTUP  
INDIA INITIATIVE  
  
Why in News?  
  
India marks 10 Years of Startup India Initiative as National Startup Day (16 Jan), Celebrating a Decade of Entrepreneurial  
  
Growth.  
  
Startup India Initiative  
  
e Launched on 16 Jan 2016.  
  
e Aim: Fostering Startup Culture and Building an Inclusive Ecosystem for (| p07  
Innovation and Entrepreneurship. . Startup  
e Core Features i e An Entity that is HQ in India.  
  
o Ease of Doing Business: Simplified Compliance, Self-Certification © Opened less than 10 years ago.  
  
and Single- Window Clearances Streamline Processes for Startups. ¢ Annual turnover less than ¢100 Crore.  
o Tax Benefits: Eligible Startups enjoy Tax Exemptions for 3 =  
. . . Terms Related to Startup Valuations  
Consecutive Financial Years. 7  
Term Valuation  
o Funding Support: =10000 Crore Fund of Funds for Startups (ates $1 Billion  
supports Early-Stage Funding. Decacorn $10 Billion  
o Sector-Specific Policies: Focused Policies for sectors like Hectocorn $100 Billion  
Biotechnology, Agriculture and Renewable Energy foster i finer Less than $1 Billion  
targeted growth. Soonicorn A Startup has potential to reach a  
valuation of $1 Bn in near future.  
  
e Managed By: Department for Promotion of Industry and  
Internal Trade (Ministry of Commerce & Industry).  
  
Flagship Schemes under Startup India  
  
e Startup India Seed Fund Scheme: Provides Financial Assistance for (© rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrnrnnrrnrnnnrrnnennnscnnnsnng  
Proof of Concept, Prototype Development, Product Trials, Market Entry \_ Related Facts ;  
and Commercialization through Eligible Incubators. i e India now ranks as World's 3" Largest i  
© Credit Guarantee Scheme for Startups: Offers Credit Guarantees for | Startup Hub, after US and China.  
  
Loans to DPIIT-recognized Startups. e 5" Edition of Startup Mahakumbh is  
  
scheduled in March in New Delhi.  
  
e Fund of Funds for Startups: Introduced in June 2016 with a corpus of  
  
%10,000 Crore to enhance Access to Domestic Capital.  
  
e BHASKAR Platform (2024): Bharat Startup Knowledge Access Registry (BHASKAR) connects Startups, Investors and  
Mentors, empowering Non— Metro Cities.  
  
e MAARG (Mentorship, Advisory, Assistance, Resilience & Growth) Mentorship Platform: To facilitate Intelligent  
Matchmaking between Mentors & Startups.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 46  
  
\=== PAGE 49 ===  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www.\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Polity and Governance  
  
e Startup Mahakumbh: Flagship Event bringing together Startups, Unicorns, Soonicorns, Investors, Industry Leaders and  
Ecosystem Stakeholders.  
  
e Atal Innovation Mission: Under NITI Aayog, AIM establishes Atal Incubation Centers to provide Physical Infrastructure  
and support to Startups.  
  
e TIDE 2.0 (Technology Incubation and Development of Entrepreneurs): Focuses on supporting Startups in Emerging  
Technologies like AI, loT and Blockchain.  
  
e GENESIS (Gen-—Next Support for Innovative Startups) 2024: Aims to boost Startups in Tier— II and Tier— II\] Cities.  
  
e NIDHI (National Initiative for Developing and Harnessing Innovations): To foster Technology — driven Ideas into  
Successful Startups, aiming for Socio— Economic Growth through Wealth and Job Creation  
  
e ASPIRE (A Scheme for Promotion of Innovation, Rural Industries and Entrepreneurship): To set up a Network of  
Technology Centres and to set up Incubation Centres to accelerate Entrepreneurship and also to promote Startups for  
Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Agro — Industry.  
  
Dear Lpt’ ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic and valuable material by putting in lot  
of time, effort, energy and money to make you successful and it would not  
be fair if someone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
And they-will create competition for you without being the part of Law  
event this unfair activity, be vigilant and inform us if you find  
dy copying (in any form) it o hing from it.  
  
Unauth 1\_cop t ze of Law Prep material is illegal and  
p hable by imprisonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
Copyright Act of 1957.  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
mpliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 47  
  
\=== PAGE 50 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Polity and Governance  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
When was the Startup India Initiative launched?  
(a) 16 January 2014 (b) 16 January 2015 (c) 16 January 2016 (d) 16 January 2017  
  
What date is celebrated as National Startup Day?  
(a) 15 January (b) 16 January (c) 26 January (d) 15 August  
  
Which department manages the Startup India Initiative?  
  
(a) Department of Science and Technology  
  
(b) Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion  
  
(c) Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT)  
(d) Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
  
Under which ministry does DPIIT operate?  
(a) Ministry of Finance (b) Ministry of Commerce & Industry  
(c) Ministry of Corporate Affairs (d) Ministry of MSME  
  
For how many consecutive financial years do eligible startups enjoy tax exemptions?  
(a) 2 years (b) 3 years (c) 5 years (d) 7 years  
  
What is the corpus of the Fund of Funds for Startups?  
(a) 75,000 Crore (b) 27,500 Crore (c) =10,000 Crore (d) =15,000 Crore  
  
When was the Fund of Funds for Startups introduced?  
(a) January 2016 (b) June 2016 (c) December 2016 (d) June 2017  
  
What does BHASKAR stand for?  
(a) Bharat Startup Knowledge and Research (b) Bharat Startup Knowledge Access Registry  
(c) Bharat Support for Knowledge and Research (d) Bharat System for Knowledge Access and Registry  
  
When was the BHASKAR Platform launched?  
(a) 2022 (b) 2023 (c) 2024 (d) 2025  
  
What is the primary purpose of BHASKAR Platform?  
  
(a) Provide funding to startups  
  
(b) Connect startups, investors and mentors, empowering non-metro cities  
(c) Register patents for startups  
  
(d) Provide tax exemptions  
  
What does MAARG stand for?  
  
(a) Mentorship, Advisory, Assistance, Research & Growth  
(b) Mentorship, Advisory, Assistance, Resilience & Growth  
(c) Management, Advisory, Assistance, Resilience & Growth  
(d) Mentorship, Analysis, Assistance, Resilience & Growth  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 48  
  
\=== PAGE 51 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Polity and Governance  
  
12\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What is the purpose of Startup Mahakumbh?  
  
(a) Government policy announcement  
  
(b) Flagship event bringing together startups, unicorns, investors and ecosystem stakeholders  
(c) Annual budget presentation  
  
(d) International trade fair  
  
Under which organization does Atal Innovation Mission operate?  
(a) Ministry of Commerce (b) DPT  
(c) NITI Aayog (d) Ministry of Science and Technology  
  
What does AIM establish to support startups?  
(a) Research Centers (b) Atal Incubation Centers  
(c) Technology Parks (d) Manufacturing Hubs  
  
What does TIDE 2.0 stand for?  
  
(a) Technology Innovation and Digital Entrepreneurship  
  
(b) Technology Incubation and Digital Economy  
  
(c) Technology Incubation and Development of Entrepreneurs  
(d) Technology Integration and Development of Economy  
  
Which emerging technologies does TIDE 2.0 focus on?  
  
(a) AI, oT and Blockchain (b) Nanotechnology, Robotics and Quantum Computing  
(c) Cloud Computing, Big Data and Cybersecurity (d) VR, AR and 5G  
  
When was GENESIS launched?  
(a) 2022 (b) 2023 (c) 2024 (d) 2025  
  
What does GENESIS stand for?  
(a) Gen-Next Support for Innovation Startups (b) Gen-Next Support for Innovative Startups  
(c) Generation Support for Innovative Startups (d) Gen-Next System for Innovative Startups  
  
What is the focus of GENESIS initiative?  
(a) Metro cities only (b) International startups  
(c) Tier-II and Tier-III cities (d) Agricultural startups only  
  
What does NIDHI stand for?  
  
(a) National Initiative for Development and Harnessing Innovations  
(b) National Initiative for Developing and Harnessing Innovations  
(c) National Integration for Developing and Harnessing Innovations  
(d) National Institute for Developing and Harnessing Innovations  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 49  
  
\=== PAGE 52 ===  
{ ", January 2026  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
INDIA — EUROPEAN  
\- es UNION FREE TRADE  
  
\> eae AGREEMENT  
  
Why in News?  
India— EU FTA Concluded by PM Modiand Ursula von der Leyen (EU's President).  
India—EU FTA finalised at 16" Summit in New Delhi, making EU India's 22" Free Trade Agreement Partner.  
  
Widely described as “Mother of All Deals”, India— EU FTA forms Economic Space for Two Billion People and Counters  
Rising Global Trade Protectionism, particularly from United States.  
  
India— EU FTA awaits Ratification by Indian Parliament and European Bodies before Full Implementation.  
  
Strategic Significance  
  
Long Negotiation Cycle: Agreement, officially known as India — EU Broad = based Trade and Investment  
Agreement (BTIA), brings to a close nearly Two Decades of Intermittent Negotiations, which began in 2007,  
suspended in 2013 & later revived in 2022.  
  
Trade Diversification: It aligns with India's Broader Effort to Diversify Trade Partnerships amid Global  
Supply Chain Disruptions and supports emerging “China — plus One” Strategy.  
  
Geopolitical Dimension: Deal strengthens India — EU Strategic Convergence in context of Shifting Global  
  
Key Outcomes of FTA  
  
1\. TariffElimination and Market Access  
¢ Overall Duty Reduction: Duties on over 90% of Bilateral Trade have been Removed.  
  
e EU Commitments: EU will Eliminate Customs Duties on 99.5% of Indian Exports, injecting an estimated $33 Billion  
boost into Labour — Intensive Sectors such as Textiles & Apparel, Leather & Footwear, and Gems & Jewellery, now  
entering EU at 0% Duty.  
  
e India's Commitments: India will Phase Out Tariffs on over 90% of EU Goods, including High Tariffs on Machinery (up  
to 44%), Chemicals (up to 22%) and Pharmaceuticals (up to 11%), offering EU Exporters savings of approx €4 Billion  
annually.  
  
2\. Calibrated Opening for High— Value Sectors  
  
e¢ Luxury Automobiles: Import Tariffs on Cars priced above €15,000 will Decline from 110% to 10% over 5 Years, witha  
Tariff Rate Quota of 250,000 Units Per Year.  
  
e Wines and Spirits: Tariffs on Premium Wines will Fall from 150% to 20—30%, while Spirits will reduce to 40%.  
  
3\. Services Sector and Professional Mobility  
  
e Talent Mobility: Agreement provides Uncapped Mobility for Indian Students, Streamlined Visas for Independent  
Professionals and Intra— Corporate Transferees.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 50  
  
\=== PAGE 53 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
e AYUSH Recognition: Practitioners of Traditional Indian Medicine gain legal clarity to operate in EU Countries where  
  
regulations were previously undefined.  
  
Sustainability and Carbon Compliance  
  
e Trade and Sustainable Development Chapter: Links Trade Flows to Environmental and Labor Standards.  
  
e Green Transition Support: EU pledges €500 Million to assist Indian Industries in Decarbonization and alignment with  
Paris Agreement.  
  
e CBAM Assurance: India receives a Most — Favoured — Nation assurance under Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism  
and will benefit from a Technical Cooperation Group to help exporters verify carbon footprints, although a Full  
Exemption was Not Granted.  
  
Strategic Exclusions and Protections in India— EU FTA  
  
e Agricultural Safeguards: To protect Rural Livelihoods and Domestic Food Security, Both India and EU have maintained  
Comprehensive “Negative Lists” for Sensitive Commodities.  
  
o India's Exclusions: Dairy, Wheat, Rice and Poultry remain Outside Tariff Reduction Framework.  
  
o EU's Exclusions: Beef, Sugar and Rice are exempted to safeguard European Farmers.  
  
e Geographical Indications (GJ) Protection: A Parallel GI Agreement reinforces Legal Protection of Iconic Products such  
  
as Darjeeling Tea and Champagne, preventing Unauthorized Use or Imitation in Either Market.  
  
Towards 2030 Agenda: India — EU Strategic Roadmap  
  
Official Title: “Towards 2030: Joint India— EU Comprehensive Strategic Agenda”  
A5\~—Year Strategic Framework adopted at 16" India— EU Summit.  
  
Aimed at transforming India — EU Relationship from a predominantly Trade — oriented Engagement into a Multi —  
  
Dimensional Strategic Partnership.  
  
Serves as a Structured Action Roadmap to navigate intensifying Geopolitical Uncertainties, Economic Fragmentation and  
Rising Protectionism.  
  
Pillar I: Prosperity and Sustainability  
  
FTA Operationalisation: Emphasis on Effective Implementation of India— EU Free Trade Agreement to integrate India witha  
Combined Market Valued at nearly $24 Trillion.  
  
Green Transition Cooperation: Launch of initiatives such as India—EU Green Hydrogen Task Force and 2026 Wind Business  
  
Summit to jointly advance Global Decarbonisation Efforts.  
  
Carbon Market Alignment: Coordination between India's Carbon Credit Trading Scheme and EU's Carbon Border  
  
Adjustment Mechanism to safeguard Competitiveness of Indian Exports.  
  
Pillar IL: Technology and Innovation  
  
Trade and Technology Council: Central Institutional Platform for cooperation on Economic Security, Research Security and  
Resilient Supply Chains.  
  
Advanced Technology Collaboration: Joint Development in Semiconductors, 6G Technologies and Quantum Computing to  
build Trusted and Secure Technology Ecosystems.  
  
Research Integration: Exploratory Discussions on India's Possible Association with Horizon Europe (EU's Main Funding  
Programme) to deepen Scientific Collaboration.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 51  
  
\=== PAGE 54 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
Pillar II: Security and Defence  
  
e Defence Partnership Framework: Establishment of a formal India — EU Security and Defence Partnership, with particular  
focus on Maritime Security in Indo-Pacific Region.  
  
e Defence Industrial Cooperation: Shift from a Transactional Buyer — Seller Model to joint R\&D, Co — Development and Co —  
Production of Defence Technologies such as Drones and Sensor Systems.  
  
e Cyber and Space Cooperation: Enhanced collaboration through mechanisms like CBI — Europol Partnership and joint  
initiatives between ISRO and European Space A gency.  
  
Pillar \[V: Connectivity and Global Challenges  
  
e IMEC Acceleration: Fast-tracking India — Middle East —- Europe Economic Corridor (IMEC) as a Transparent and Rules —  
based Alternative to Opaque Infrastructure Financing Models.  
  
e Global Gateway Synergy: Leveraging EU's €300 billion Global Gateway Initiative to support High — Quality  
Infrastructure Development in India and joint projects across Africa.  
  
Pillar V: Enablers — Skills and Mobility  
  
e Labour Mobility Facilitation: Establishment of a European Legal Gateway in India to streamline Lawful Migration  
Pathways for Skilled Professionals, particularly in ICT and Healthcare Sectors.  
  
e Qualification Recognition: Aiming for Mutual Recognition of Professional Qualifications by 2030, enabling Automatic  
Validity of Indian Credentials across All 27 EU Member States.  
  
“US Factor” in India — EU Trade Strategy  
Strategic Hedging: India — EU FTA provides a Geopolitical Buffer against fluctuations in U.S. Trade Policy.  
  
o Following Imposition of 50% Reciprocal Tariffs on Indian Goods in Aug 2025, EU emerges as a Stable,  
Rules — based Alternative Market.  
  
Catalyst from U.S. Policies: Heightened “America First” Protectionism under Trump Administration, coupled  
with disputes such as US — EU Greenland Conflict, served as a Decisive Trigger to break Two — Decade Long  
Negotiation Deadlock with EU.  
  
Market Diversification: India is actively reducing its reliance on U.S. Market, where a $45.8 Billion Trade  
  
Surplus is exposed to potential sanctions, by pivoting toward €22.5 Trillion EU Economy.  
  
Regulatory Sovereignty and Global Balance: Through alignment with EU Standards, India and Europe are  
Jointly creating a “Third Pole” in Global Trade, enhancing Autonomy and Avoiding Forced Alignment with  
Either U.S. Transactional Policies or Chinese Economic Coercion.  
  
Significance of India — EU Free Trade Agreement  
  
e Economic Transformation and Market Expansion: FTA is poised to deliver a Major Stimulus to India's Manufacturing and  
Agricultural Sectors by dismantling Long — Standing Trade Barriers, enabling Indian Goods to compete on a Level Playing  
Field in European Market.  
  
e Trade Diversification and Hedging: Agreement reduces Dependence on a Single Market and provides a Strategic Buffer  
against Global Uncertainties, including fluctuating U.S. Tariff Policies.  
  
e Global Standards Compliance: Adoption of EU Regulations (Brussels Effec) enhances International Competitiveness of  
  
Indian Products, opening doors to High— Standard Markets such as Japan and U.S.  
  
e China — Plus — One Strategy: Aligning Regulatory Standards with EU positions India as a Trusted, Rules — based  
Manufacturing Alternative, particularly for critical sectors like Semiconductors and Green Technologies.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 52  
  
\=== PAGE 55 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Green Transition Support: To address Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism, India secured €500 Million in Technical and  
Financial Assistance & Most - Favored - Nation Status, enabling a Just and Sustainable Green Transition.  
  
Protection for Vulnerable Sectors: Sensitive Industries such as Dairy and Cereals remain safeguarded under Negative Lists,  
ensuring Small - Scale Farmers are shielded from Import Surges.  
  
Major Challenges in India — EU FTA  
  
Tariff Disparities: EU is advocating for Reductions in India's High Import Duties on Automobiles, Wines, Spirits and  
Medical Devices.  
  
o — Indiaremains Cautious, prioritizing Domestic Manufacturing Protection and Safeguarding Strategic Sectors.  
  
Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism: Effective from | Jan 2026, CBAM imposes a Carbon Tax on Imports such as Steel,  
Aluminium and Cement, raising costs by 20-35%.  
  
o India views this as a potential “Green Protectionist” measure that could undermine Export Competitiveness.  
  
Agriculture and Dairy: India has designated these as “Red Lines”, resisting Full Liberalization to protect Livelihoods of  
Millions of Smallholder Farmers.  
  
o EU, conversely, seeks Lower Tariffs on Products like Cheese and Grains.  
  
Non — Tariff Barriers: Indian Exporters, particularly in Pharmaceuticals and Agricultural Commodities (e.g., Basmati rice),  
face Stringent EU Requirements for Pesticide Residues, Certification and Labeling, posing compliance challenges.  
  
Labor Mobility: India is pressing for Easier Visa Access and Mutual Recognition Agreements for its IT, Healthcare and  
Engineering Professionals.  
  
o EU Member States remain divided on Relaxing Migration—related Rules, complicating Talent Mobility.  
  
Data Governance: A Regulatory Gap exists between EU's GDPR and India's DPDP Act 2023.  
o EUemphasizes “Free Flow of Data with Trust”, while India stresses “Data Sovereignty and Local Storage for National  
  
Security”, creating friction in Digital Trade Negotiations.  
  
Intellectual Property Rights: EU demands for Stricter IP Protections and Data Exclusivity could Delay Generic Medicine  
Production, challenging India's Role as a Global Pharmaceutical Supplier.  
  
Russia — Ukraine Conflict: Divergent Foreign Policy Approaches, particularly India's Neutral Stance and ongoing Energy  
ties with Russia, have created a Trust Deficit with EU Partners.  
  
European Union  
  
Nature: Political and Economic Union of 27 Member States.  
  
Established in 1992 (Maastricht Treaty formally created European Commission  
  
European Union). ie Traces its origins to formation of European :  
  
o Beganas European Coal and Steel Community (1951) with Rowe, Community in 1958, following Treat  
6 Founding Members (Belgium, France, Germany, ie Executive Arm of European Union (Brussel:  
Luxembourg, Netherlands); evolved through Treaty of | Belgium)  
Rome (1957). ¢ Operates independently from Nationa  
  
i Governments of EU Member States.  
  
i © Composed of 27 Commissioners.  
  
i 1 from Each EU Member State, are appointed fo  
a5— Year Term.  
  
o Treaties of Rome established European Economic  
  
Community and Euratom (European Atomic Energy  
Community).  
  
o 2020: United Kingdom withdrew (Brexit), reducing EU  
membership from 28 to 27.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 53  
  
\=== PAGE 56 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Key Institutions:  
  
fe}  
  
oO Oo 0 0  
  
European Commission: Executive Body; Proposes Laws, Enforces Rules and Manages Budget.  
European Parliament: EU's Only elected Legislative Body; Co—Legislates and Approves Budget.  
European Council: Heads of State/Government; Sets Overall Political Direction.  
  
Court of Justice of EU: Ensures Uniform Application of EU Law.  
  
European Central Bank: Manages Euro and Monetary Policy for Eurozone.  
  
Currency: Euro (Used by 21 Member States; Bulgaria adopted Euro on | Jan 2026).  
  
India — European Union Relationship  
Historical Background  
o =: 1962: India established Diplomatic Relations with European Economic Community (EU's Predecessor).  
o 2000: I" India— EU Summit held in Lisbon.  
o ©2004: Upgraded to a Strategic Partnership at The Hague Summit.  
Economic and Trade Relations  
o \_EUremains India's Largest Trading Partner in Goods and 2" Largest Destination for Indian Exports after USA.  
o Bilateral Trade (2024 —25): $136.53 Billion (India's Exports: $75.85 Billion; Imports: $60.68 Billion)  
o EU accounts for 17% of India's Total Exports, while India represents 9% of EU Overseas Shipments.  
o Investment: EU is India's Largest Foreign Investor.  
Key Institutional Mechanisms H  
o India — EU Trade and Technology Council (2023): Coordinates Cooperation on Trade, Trusted Technology,  
Digital Infrastructure, Green Tech and Security.  
o — India— Middle East — Europe Economic Corridor (2023): A Strategic Connectivity initiative linking India with |  
Europe via Middle East. i  
Space Cooperation: ISRO launched EU's PROBA—3 Mi.  
  
Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism  
  
EU enforces World's 1“ Carbon Border Tax (CBAM) from | January 2026, Ending Transitional Reporting Phase.  
  
CBAM is an EU Policy that Imposes a Carbon Price on Imports of Selected Goods from Countries with Less Stringent  
  
Climate Regulations.  
  
o Legal Basis: Part of EU's Fit for 55 Climate Package aligned with its Net— Zero Targets.  
  
Objectives  
  
o Prevent Carbon Leakage: Discourage Companies from Relocating Production to Countries with Weaker Emission  
Norms.  
  
o Level Playing Field: Ensure Imported Goods face a Carbon Cost comparable to EU — made Products under EU  
Emissions Trading System.  
  
o Climate Integrity: Avoid undermining EU's Domestic Decarbonisation Efforts.  
  
Timeline  
  
o 2023-2025: Transitional Phase (Mandatory Emissions Reporting, No Financial Levy).  
  
o From 1 January 2026: Full implementation with Carbon Levy payable on Imports.  
  
Sectors Covered: Cement, Aluminium, Fertilisers, Iron and Steel, Hydrogen, Electricity  
  
Mechanism: Importers must purchase CBAM Certificates corresponding to Embedded Carbon Emissions in goods.  
  
fe}  
  
fe}  
  
Price of Certificates linked to EU ETS Carbon Price.  
Credits allowed if Carbon Tax Already Paid in Exporting Country.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 54  
  
\=== PAGE 57 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
LAW PREP  
—Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Extra Shots  
  
after 2020.  
  
Environmental and Human Rights Risks.  
  
ie EU Deforestation Regulation: Imports like Coffee, Rubber and Wood must Not originate from Land Deforested  
  
¢ Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence: From 2027, Companies must Audit Entire Supply Chains for  
  
o Indian Manufacturers cite Business Confidentiality and Competitive Risks in sharing Sensitive Supplier Data.  
  
e — Industrial Accelerator Act: Proposed EU Legislation introducing Local Content Norms could favour European —  
  
made Goods, su  
  
ressing demand for Indian Components and Finished Products.  
  
Skill - Up: FTA, TRIPS, WTO, G20, G7, Schengen Area, GDPR, India — EFTA FTA, Project 75 and 75 — I  
  
and Netherlands).  
  
Current Member States: 27 countries  
  
European Union (EU)  
  
\* Founded: In 1951 by 6 countries (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg,  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
\* The EU was officially formed by the Maastricht Treaty, effective November |, 1993. /\\  
  
Germany has the EU's largest  
population, while France is the  
largest by area.  
  
Malta is the EU's  
  
Held every 5 years to elect European  
Parliament members.  
  
The European Parliament is the EU's  
only elected legislative body.  
  
smallest country by  
population and area.  
  
The Schengen Area has allowed  
border-free travel since 1985.  
  
All EU members except Cyprus and  
Ireland are in the Schengen Area.  
  
The EU single market includes  
27 EU and 4 non-EU countries.  
  
The world's largest exporter, handling 14%  
lof global goods trade. The EU exports most  
to the US and imports most from China.  
  
SU: eedelielne A The euro, launched in 1999, is the  
La \> currency of 20 EU countries,  
E a forming the euro area.  
  
Aims to cut net greenhouse emissions  
by 55% by 2030 (vs. 1990).  
  
The EU's €17 trillion GDP is 72% from  
services, led by Germany, France, and  
Italy.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FollowusNow B@O@  
  
Nobel Peace Prize 2012  
The EU was honored for advancing  
  
peace, democracy, and human rights  
  
55  
  
\=== PAGE 58 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
Who is the President of the European Union who concluded the FTA with PM Modi?  
(a) Christine Lagarde (b) Ursula von der Leyen  
(c) Charles Michel (d) Roberta Metsola  
  
At which summit was the India-EU FTA finalized?  
(a) 14th India-EU Summit (b) 15th India-EU Summit  
(c) 16th India-EU Summit (d) 17th India-EU Summit  
  
The India-EU FTA makes EU India's how many-th Free Trade Agreement partner?  
(a) 18" (b) 20" (c) 22™ (d) 24"  
  
What percentage of EU customs duties will be eliminated on Indian exports?  
(a) 95.5% (b) 97.5% (c) 99.5% (d) 100%  
  
What is the estimated boost to India's labour-intensive sectors from the FTA?  
(a) $23 billion (b) $28 billion (c) $33 billion (d) $38 billion  
  
How much will EU exporters save annually from tariff reductions?  
(a) €2 billion (b) €3 billion (c) €4 billion (d) €5 billion  
  
What will be the final tariff on luxury automobiles priced above €15,000 after 5 years?  
(a) 5% (b) 10% (c) 15% (d) 20%  
  
What is the current tariff on luxury automobiles that will be reduced?  
(a) 90% (b) 100% (c) 110% (d) 120%  
  
What is the Tariff Rate Quota for automobiles per year?  
(a) 150,000 units (b) 200,000 units (c) 250,000 units (d) 300,000 units  
  
How much has the EU pledged to assist Indian industries in decarbonization?  
(a) €300 million (b) €400 million (c) €500 million (d) €600 million  
  
Which Indian agricultural products are excluded from tariff reduction framework?  
(a) Tea, Coffee, Spices (b) Dairy, Wheat, Rice, Poultry  
(c) Fruits, Vegetables, Grains (d) Cotton, Jute, Sugarcane  
  
What is the official title of the India-EU Strategic Roadmap?  
  
(a) "Vision 2030: India-EU Partnership"  
  
(b) "Towards 2030: Joint India-EU Comprehensive Strategic Agenda"  
(c) "India-EU Strategic Framework 2030"  
  
(d) "Partnership 2030: India-EU Cooperation"  
  
What is the combined market value that India-EU FTA aims to integrate?  
(a) $20 trillion (b) $22 trillion (c) $24 trillion (d) $26 trillion  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 56  
  
\=== PAGE 59 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Economics  
  
20\.  
  
4\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What is the value of EU's Global Gateway Initiative?  
(a) €200 billion (b) €250 billion (c) €300 billion (d) €350 billion  
  
How many EU member states are there currently?  
(a) 25 (b) 26 (c) 27 (d) 28  
  
When was the European Union formally established by the Maastricht Treaty?  
(a) 1990 (b) 1991 (c) 1992 (d) 1993  
  
How many founding members did the European Coal and Steel Community have in 1951?  
(a)4 (b) 5 (c) 6 (d)7  
  
When did the United Kingdom withdraw from the EU (Brexit)?  
(a) 2018 (b) 2019 (c) 2020 (d) 2021  
  
How many EU member states use the Euro as currency?  
(a) 19 (b) 20 (c) 21 (d) 22  
  
From when does the EU's Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) fully implement with carbon levy?  
(a) 1 January 2025 (b) 1 January 2026 (c) 1 July 2026 (d) 1 January 2027  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 57  
  
\=== PAGE 60 ===  
{\_-S, January 2026  
  
\=, TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
CHINA'S POPULATION  
DECLINES FOR  
FOURTH CONSECUTIVE  
YEAR  
  
Why in News?  
  
China's Population Falls by 3.39 Million in 2025 to 1.405 Billion as Births Drop to 7.92 Million, Deepening Demographic  
Slowdown.  
  
Demographic Winter  
  
A Demographic Phase marked by a Persistent and Structural Decline in ¢  
Population Growth. Implications  
ie Shrinking Workforce and Slowing  
  
No Longer Limited to Developed Countries; now a Global Phenomenon :  
Economic Growth  
  
with Deep Economic and Social Consequences. ie Pressure on Pension Systems and  
  
Healthcare  
  
Key Indicators i  
Rising Fiscal Burden due to Ageing i  
  
o Fertility Rate Below Replacement Level (2.1 Children Per Woman).  
Population  
  
Potential Loss of Demographic  
Dividend  
  
co Inverted Population Pyramid: Shrinking Young Population and  
  
Expanding Elderly Population  
  
o Rising Old—Age Dependency Ratio.  
  
Causes of Demographic Winter  
  
Delayed Life Milestones: Later Marriages and Parenthood due to Career Priorities, Economic Insecurity, High  
Housing and Education Costs. H  
  
Urbanisation: Smaller and Costlier Urban Housing discourages Larger Families.  
  
Societal & Cultural Shifts: Greater Female Workforce Participation, Preference for Smaller Families,  
Changing Family Norms i  
  
Access to Family Planning: Greater Reproductive Autonomy reduces Unintended Births  
  
Negative Impacts of Declining Population  
Shrinking Workforce threatens Future Labour Supply as Youth Replacement falls Short over time.  
  
Ageing Population Growth poses Rising Burden on Healthcare, Elderly Care and Pension Systems.  
  
Low-—Fertility States face Youth Shortages, High — Fertility States struggle with Overpopulation.  
  
Fertility Aspirations Unmet as Economic and Social Barriers prevent many from having Desired Number of Children  
Declining Fertility and Late Marriages linked to Rising Social Isolation and Mental Health Challenges.  
  
Smaller Families disrupt Traditional Support Systems, Leading to Greater Elderly Isolation.  
Developed Nation Trends show Rebound Unlikely once Rates Fall Below Replacement Level.  
  
Evolution of Birth Control Policy in China  
  
Early Phase (Pre 1970s): Under Mao Zedong, Birth Control Existed but was Not a Major Policy Priority.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 58  
  
\=== PAGE 61 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Reports, Summits, Indices  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
o The Great Leap Forward (1958 — 62) aimed to Boost Production and Living Standards but resulted in Famine and  
Millions of Deaths.  
  
o Population growth Rebounded after Rollback of The Great Leap Forward.  
  
Shift Towards Population Control (1970s): Later Five — Year Plans promoted Birth Control, often through Coercive  
Measures.  
  
co Theslogan “Later, Longer, Fewer” encouraged Delayed Marriages, Longer Intervals between Births, Fewer Children  
  
One- Child Policy (1980): Formally Restricted Most Couples to a Single Child.  
  
co Aimed to curb Rapid Population Growth and Ease Pressure on Resources.  
  
Reasons for China's Population Decline  
  
Sharp Fall in Total Fertility Rate: China's TFR declined to 1.3 Births Per Woman (2020 Census), far below replacement level  
  
of 2.1.  
  
Legacy of One— Child Policy: Introduced in 1980, Policy is credited with Reducing TFR from 2.75 (1979) to 1.3 (2020).  
  
o Despite its official end in 2016 (Two — Child Policy) and further relaxation to a Three — Child Policy in 2021, Fertility  
Rates have Not Rebounded, indicating Deep — Rooted Behavioural and Socio— Economic Shifts.  
  
Rising Female Education and Workforce Participation: Higher Levels of Education and Employment have enhanced  
  
Women's Autonomy over Reproductive Decisions, contributing to Delayed Childbirth and Smaller Family Sizes.  
  
Changing Social Attitudes and Family Norms: Growing Disengagement from Traditional Family Structures and Customs  
  
has Reduced Societal Pressure to Marry Early or have Multiple Children.  
  
Economic Pressures and Lifestyle Stress: Intense Job Competition, High Urban Living Costs, Housing Pressures and Work —  
  
Life Imbalance discourage Marriage and Childbearing, particularly among Younger Generations.  
  
Impact of COVID — 19 Pandemic: Pandemic — related Mortality and Economic Uncertainty further Accelerated Population  
Decline and Discouraged Fertility.  
  
UNFPA's State of World Population 2025  
  
Current World Population: 8.2 Billion  
  
Top 5 Populous Countries: India \> China \> USA\> Indonesia \> Pakistan  
Global TFR: 2.25 in 2024; Projected to Hit Replacement Level of 2.1 by 2050.  
o Highest TFR: Niger\>Somalia\>DR Congo  
  
o Lowest TFR: South Korea \< Hong Kong \< Singapore  
  
Ageing Population: Rapid Increase in Global Elderly Population (65+)  
o Japan (30%), Europe (20%), India (7%)  
  
Key Terms  
  
Fertility: Number of Children Born to a Woman During Reproductive Years (Ages 15—49)  
  
Total Fertility Rate: Average Births per Woman.  
o 2.1 considered Replacement Level for Population Stability.  
  
Demographic Dividend: Economic Growth Potential from Larger Working — Age Population Compared to  
Dependents in a Country's Age Structure. i  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 59  
  
\=== PAGE 62 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Reports, Summits, Indices  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
India's Fertility Rate  
  
e Fertility Rate (2025): 1.9 (Below Replacement Level: 2.1)  
  
e Population (2025): Estimated at 146.39 Crore \[Highest in the world, surpassing China 141.61 Crore: China's One — Child  
Policy (1979 —2015) curbed Birth Rates but Accelerated Population Aging\]  
  
e = Working—Age Population (15—64 years): 68%  
  
e Regional Disparities in Fertility  
  
o Above—Replacement States: Bihar (2.98) \> Meghalaya \> UP\> Jharkhand \> Manipur  
  
o Below—Replacement States: Kerala \<Tamil Nadu \< Delhi \< West Bengal  
  
e — Factors Behind Fertility Decline  
  
o Economic Pressures: 38% cite Financial Stress as Main Reason for Fewer Children.  
  
v Job Insecurity (21%), Housing Challenges (22%), Lack of Childcare (18%)  
o Family Dynamics: Partner Preference (19%), Lack of Domestic Help (15%)  
  
o Medical Pressure: 14% felt Healthcare providers Influenced Fertility Decisions  
  
Government Initiatives on Fertility in India  
  
e National Population Policy 2000: Goal to Achieve  
Replacement-Level Fertility (TFR 2.1), Focuses on  
Voluntary Choice, Contraception Access and Maternal-  
Child Health Improvement.  
  
e Scheme for ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activists)  
Workers: Promote Birth Spacing and Contraceptive Use,  
Facilitate Institutional Deliveries.  
  
o Critical role in Rural Fertility Management and  
Awareness among Young mothers.  
  
e Janani Suraksha Yojana & Janani Shishu Suraksha  
Karyakram: Encourage Institutional Deliveries to Reduce  
Maternal and Infant Mortality.  
  
o Provide Free Delivery, Transport, and Postnatal Care,  
supporting Family Planning post-— delivery.  
  
e Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006: Proposal to raise  
  
Legal Age of Marriage for Girls to 21 Years.  
  
o Aimsto Reduce Adolescent Pregnancies and Early Childbearing.  
  
UNFPA  
  
Founded: 1969 (as United Nations Fund for  
  
Population Activities)  
  
o Renamed: 1987 as United Nations |  
  
Population Fund (UNFPA)  
  
Mission: Ensure Sexual and Reproductive Health  
  
and Rights for All.  
  
o Empower Women and Youth to make |  
  
Informed Choices about their Bodies and i  
  
Lives.  
  
Supports SDG 3 (Good Health), SDG 4 (Quality |  
  
Education), SDG 5 (Gender Equality).  
Head. Natalia Kanem  
HQ: New York (USA)  
  
Skill — up: ECOSOC, WHO, UNDP, UNICEF  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
60  
  
\=== PAGE 63 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Reports, Summits, Indices  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
1\. By how many million did China's population fall in 2025?  
(a) 2.39 million (b) 3.39 million (c) 4.39 million (d) 5.39 million  
  
2\. What was China's total population in 2025?  
  
(a) 1.395 billion (b) 1.400 billion (c) 1.405 billion (d) 1.410 billion  
3\. How many births were recorded in China in 2025?  
  
(a) 6.92 million (b) 7.92 million (c) 8.92 million (d) 9.92 million  
4\. What is the replacement level fertility rate?  
  
(a) 1.9 children per woman (b) 2.0 children per woman  
  
(c) 2.1 children per woman (d) 2.5 children per woman  
  
5\. During which period did "The Great Leap Forward" occur in China?  
(a) 1955-1960 (b) 1958-1962 (c) 1960-1965 (d) 1962-1967  
  
6\. What was the slogan promoted in China's 1970s birth control policy?  
(a) "One Child, One Nation" (b) "Later, Longer, Fewer"  
(c) "Small Family, Happy Family" (d) "Quality over Quantity"  
  
7\. When was China's One-Child Policy formally introduced?  
(a) 1975 (b) 1978 (c) 1980 (d) 1982  
  
8\. What was China's Total Fertility Rate (TFR) according to the 2020 Census?  
(a) 1.1 births per woman (b) 1.3 births per woman  
(c) 1.5 births per woman (d) 1.7 births per woman  
  
9\. When did China officially end the One-Child Policy and introduce the Two-Child Policy?  
(a) 2014 (b) 2015 (c) 2016 (d) 2017  
  
0\. | When did China introduce the Three-Child Policy?  
(a) 2019 (b) 2020 (c) 2021 (d) 2022  
  
1\. | What is the current world population according to UNFPA's State of World Population 2025?  
(a) 7.8 billion (b) 8.0 billion (c) 8.2 billion (d) 8.5 billion  
  
2\. | What is the top most populous country in the world?  
(a) China (b) USA (c) India (d) Indonesia  
  
3\. What is the global TFR in 2024?  
(a) 2.05 (b) 2.15 (c) 2.25 (d) 2.35  
  
4\. By which year is the global TFR projected to hit replacement level?  
(a) 2040 (b) 2045 (c) 2050 (d) 2055  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 61  
  
\=== PAGE 64 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Reports, Summits, Indices  
  
5\. | Which country has the highest TFR?  
  
9\. What is India's estimated population in 2025 (in crores)?  
(a) 142.39 crore (b) 144.39 crore (c) 146.39 crore  
  
20\. | What percentage of India's population is of working age (15-64 years)?  
(a) 62% (b) 65% (c) 68%  
  
Dear Lpt’ians  
  
(a) Somalia (b) DR Congo (c) Niger (d) Chad  
6\. | Which country has the lowest TFR?  
  
(a) Hong Kong (b) Singapore (c) South Korea (d) Japan  
7\. What percentage of Japan's population is 65 years or older?  
  
(a) 20% (b) 25% (c) 30% (d) 35%  
8\. | What is India's fertility rate in 2025?  
  
(a) 1.7 (b) 1.9 (c) 2.1 (d) 2.3  
  
(d) 148.39 crore  
  
(d) 70%  
  
We create most inventive, authentic and valuable material by putting in lot  
  
y to make you successful and it would not  
  
u without being the part of Law  
prep. To prevent this unfair i zilant and inform us if you find  
  
anybody copying (in any form) it or teaching from it.  
  
Law Prep material is illegal and  
onment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
Copyright Act of 195  
  
Feel free to be intouch for  
dback/complaints/compliments 94141 43101  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
62  
  
\=== PAGE 65 ===  
i January 2026  
(32, TOPIC  
. \~“inNEWS  
  
UN HIGH SEAS  
TREATY  
  
ENTERS INTO FORCE  
  
The UN High Seas Treaty  
  
Why in News?  
UN High Seas Treaty (BBNJ) enters into force, establishing 1st Global Legal Framework to Protect Ocean Biodiversity  
Beyond National Jurisdiction.  
  
Outer Space UNCLOS Maritime Zones  
  
National Airspace International Airspace  
  
NM = Nautical Mile = 1.852 km  
  
24NM  
  
Contiguous Zone  
  
Territorial Sea  
State has full sovereignty  
  
(Pursuit Zone) High Seas  
State can act against  
  
those who break the law  
  
Exclusive Economic Zone  
State has the right to exploit all economic resources  
  
200 NM (320 km)  
  
Individual countries  
can claim control  
  
Free for navigation by  
vessels of all nations  
  
UN High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement)  
  
e Adopted: 2023  
  
e A Legally Binding International Treaty governing Ocean Spaces beyond National Jurisdiction, including High Seas and  
International Seabed Area.  
o These areas are considered Global Commons, Open to All States for activities such as Navigation, Overflight and Laying  
of Submarine Cables and Pipelines.  
o Collectively, they account for over 2.3" of World's Ocean Surface, making Governance and Conservation Critically  
Important.  
e Negotiated under United Nations — led Inter— Governmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond National  
Jurisdiction.  
¢ Becomes 3“ implementing agreement under UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), alongside 1994 Agreement  
on Part XI (Deep Seabed Mining) and 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 63  
  
\=== PAGE 66 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
e Core Objective: Safeguard Biodiversity in High Seas (Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction), contributing to Kunming —  
Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (30% Protection of Land & Sea by 2030).  
  
e 64 Pillars of the BBNJ Agreement: Marine Genetic Resources, Area — Based Management Tools, Environmental Impact  
Assessments, Capacity Building and Technology Transfer  
  
e Establishes Conference of the Parties (COP) as Decision — Making Body.  
  
e Ratified By: 83 Countries (India has signed the agreement, Ratification Pending)  
  
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION  
ON THE LAW OF THE SEA  
(UNCLOS)  
  
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea  
(UNCLOS), also called Constitution for the oceans, has 168  
parties, and sets out the legal framework within which all  
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out.  
  
The Convention has created three new institutions  
on the International level  
  
THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL \]  
FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA  
  
An independent judicial body. It has jurisdiction over any dispute  
  
concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention,  
and over all matters specifically provided for in any other  
agreement which confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal  
  
O 2 THE INTERNATIONAL  
SEABED AUTHORITY  
ISA has the mandate to ensure the effective protection  
  
of the marine environment from harmful effects that  
may arise from deep-seabed related activities  
  
THE COMMISSION ON THE LIMITS  
  
OF THE CONTINENTAL SHELF  
To facilitate the implementation of the UNCLOS in respect of the  
establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond  
  
200 nautical miles (M) from the baselines from which the breadth  
of the territorial sea is measured  
  
Fisheries Sector in India  
i e¢ = Total Fish Output (2024-25): 197.75 Lakh Tonnes  
  
e Fisheries contribute 7.43% to Agriculture Gross Value Added (Highest Contribution among Agriculture &  
: Allied Sectors). i  
  
Le 2" Largest Producer (8% of World Production) | 2" Largest Aquaculture Producer | 4" Largest Exporter.  
  
|e Lin Shrimp Production | 3" in Capture Fisheries Production  
  
e¢ = United States is Largest Importer of Indian Seafood.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 64  
  
\=== PAGE 67 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (2020)  
  
e Introduced as part of "Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package" with an  
  
investment of Rs 20,050 Crores. National Fisheries Development Board  
ie Established: 2006  
  
e Aim: To bring Blue Revolution through Sustainable and: H  
: ¢ Aims: To enhance Fish Production and ;  
  
Responsible Development of Fisheries Sector in India & and  
  
Doubling Farmers’ Income. Productivity in India & to coordinate Fishery i  
  
Development in an integrated and holistic i  
  
e Focuses on Modernizing Fisheries Infrastructure, Promoting manner.  
  
Sustainable Aquaculture Practices, Improving Post — Harvest i © — Works under Ministry of Fisheries, Animal i  
  
Management, enhancing Livelihoods of Fishers & Fish Farmers. Husbandry and Dairying  
  
HQ: Hyderabad (Telangana)  
  
e Nodal Agency: National Fisheries Development Board  
  
e Ministry: Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying (Rajiv  
Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh).  
  
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah — Yojana  
  
Sub — Scheme under “Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana” for “Micro and Small Enterprises’ ‘operating  
in Fisheries Sector.  
  
Objective: Formalization of Fisheries Sector under a National Fisheries Digital Platform & supporting  
  
Fisheries Micro and Small Enterprises.  
  
Investment: %6,000 Crore  
  
o “50%” Public Finance including "World Bank" and "Agence Frangaise de Développement" (AFD)  
External Financing & “Rest 50%" Investment from “Private Sector” leverage.  
  
Implementation Period: 4 Year (From 2023 — 24 to 2026-27).  
  
Government Initiatives for Growth of Fisheries Sector  
  
e Blue Revolution 2015: Promote Sustainable Development amd foc rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrerrcrnereennnnennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnneneng  
Management of Fisheries Sector. Extra Shots  
  
ie Fisheries: State Subject  
  
e¢ = National Fish Farmers Day: July 10  
  
e = World Fisheries Day: Nov 21 i  
  
Strengthening Fisheries Governance. : @ India's I" Dugong (Sea Cow) Conservation  
  
e Sagarmala Programme 2015: To promote Port — led Reserve: Palk Bay (Tamil Nadu)  
: o Sea Cow: Only Known Marine  
  
o. Focus: Increasing Fish Production and Productivity through  
  
Adoption of Modern Technologies, Enhancing  
  
Infrastructure Facilities, Promoting Entrepreneurship and  
  
Development and unlock potential of India's Maritime Sector.  
  
Herbivorous Mammal  
  
e National Fisheries Policy 2020: Provide a Comprehensive  
  
Framework for Sustainable Development of Fisheries Sector.  
e — 1"Ever Riverine Dolphin Estimation: To assess Population and Conservation Needs of River Dolphins in India.  
o Estimated a total of 6,327 Dolphins across 28 Rivers in 8 States.  
  
o Revealed Uttar Pradesh as having Highest Population, followed by Bihar, West Bengal, Assam.  
  
e Fisheries Infrastructure Development Fund: Envisages Creation of Fisheries Infrastructure Facilities both in Marine and  
Inland Fisheries Sectors.  
  
o Nodal Loaning Entities: NABARD, National Cooperatives Development Corporation, All Scheduled Banks.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 65  
  
\=== PAGE 68 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
e Matsya Setu App: Launched by NFDB and ICAR — Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture (Bhubaneswar) to Offer  
Online Training Modules for Fish Farmers and Stakeholders.  
  
e Integrated Aqua Parks: 5 Parks in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, Nagaland.  
  
e Development of 100 Climate Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages.  
  
WTO Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies  
Adopted at 12" Ministerial Conference 2022  
o Enters into Force, after Two-Thirds Member approval, in Sep 2025.  
  
Objective: Establish Binding Rules to Curb Harmful Fisheries Subsidies.  
o Supports SDG 14— Conserve and Sustainably Use Oceans, Seas and Marine Resources.  
  
¢ Subsidies Prohibited: Those linked to Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing.  
o Subsidies for Fishing on Overfished Stocks.  
o Support for Fishing in Unregulated High Seas.  
  
Members must submit Fisheries — related Data.  
  
o India's Position: Did Not Join, citing Need to protect Small Fishers, Livelihoods and Food Security.  
WTO Fish Fund: Provides Aid to Developing and LDC Members for implementation.  
Special & Differential Treatment: Flexibility for Developing Countries, though Within Common Rules.  
  
About Peace Clause  
  
Gangetic Dolphin  
  
Scientific Name: Platanista Gangetica  
Type: Freshwater Species H  
Inhabits Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna and  
  
Karnaphuli-Sangu River Systems of Nepal, India, }  
Bangladesh. i  
  
Recognized as India's National Aquatic Animal.  
Declared State Aquatic Animal of Punjab. i  
Irrawaddy Dolphin found in India in Chilika Lake  
(Asia's Largest Brackish Water Lagoon) in Odisha.  
IUCN Conservation Status: Endangered  
  
Established in 2013 under the Bali Agreement.  
  
It permits developing nations to exceed  
the 10% ceiling of subsidy without facing legal action  
by other members temporarily.  
  
Conditions for Government  
\+ avoid distorting trade or impacting other countries’ food security  
\+ provide information to show they are meeting those conditions.  
  
Subsidies of WTO  
  
Blue Box  
  
Green Box  
  
Subsidies that do not  
distort trade, or cause  
  
Broad range of  
subsidies allowed but  
  
must be designed to  
minimise trade  
distortion  
  
minimal disruption.  
  
No limit.  
No limit.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 66  
  
\=== PAGE 69 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
What does BBNJ stand for?  
(a) Bilateral Biodiversity and National Jurisdiction (b) Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction  
(c) Biological Boundaries in National Jurisdiction (d) Binding Biodiversity Negotiation for Justice  
  
When was the UN High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement) adopted?  
(a) 2020 (b) 2021 (c) 2022 (d) 2023  
  
What percentage of the world's ocean surface do high seas and international seabed areas account for?  
(a) Over half (50%) (b) Over one-third (33%)  
(c) Over two-thirds (66%) (d) Over three-quarters (75%)  
  
Under which UN conference was the BBNJ Agreement negotiated?  
  
(a) UN Climate Change Conference  
  
(b) UN Inter-Governmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction  
(c) UN Conference on Sustainable Development  
  
(d) UN Ocean Conference  
  
How many implementing agreements does UNCLOS have including BBNJ?  
(a)2 (b) 3 (c)4 (d)5  
  
What is the 1994 Agreement under UNCLOS related to?  
(a) Marine Pollution (b) Deep Seabed Mining (Part XI)  
(c) Fisheries Management (d) Territorial Waters  
  
What global biodiversity framework does BBNJ contribute to?  
(a) Paris Agreement (b) Aichi Biodiversity Targets  
(c) Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (d) Rio Declaration  
  
What is the protection target mentioned in the Kunming-Montreal Framework?  
(a) 20% of land and sea by 2025 (b) 30% of land and sea by 2030  
(c) 40% of land and sea by 2035 (d) 50% of land and sea by 2040  
  
How many pillars does the BBNJ Agreement have?  
(a) 2 (b)3 (c)4 (d)5  
  
Which of the following is NOT one of the four pillars of BBNJ Agreement?  
(a) Marine Genetic Resources (b) Environmental Impact Assessments  
(c) Climate Change Mitigation (d) Capacity Building and Technology Transfer  
  
What body is established as the decision-making body under BBNJ?  
(a) General Assembly (b) Security Council  
(c) Conference of the Parties (COP) (d) International Court of Justice  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 67  
  
\=== PAGE 70 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
How many countries have ratified the BBNJ Agreement?  
(a) 63 (b) 73 (c) 83 (d) 93  
  
What is India's status regarding the BBNJ Agreement?  
(a) Ratified (b) Signed, ratification pending  
(c) Not signed (d) Rejected  
  
When was Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana introduced?  
(a) 2018 (b) 2019 (c) 2020 (d) 2021  
  
What is the total investment for Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana?  
(a) Rs 10,050 Crores (b) Rs 15,050 Crores (c) Rs 20,050 Crores (d) Rs 25,050 Crores  
  
Under which package was Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana introduced?  
(a) Make in India (b) Digital India  
(c) Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package (d) Startup India  
  
Which is the nodal agency for Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana?  
(a) National Fisheries Development Board (b) Marine Products Export Development Authority  
(c) Coastal Aquaculture Authority (d) Central Institute of Fisheries Education  
  
When was the Blue Revolution initiative launched?  
(a) 2010 (b) 2012 (c) 2015 (d) 2018  
  
What is the Sagarmala Programme focused on?  
  
(a) Marine conservation  
  
(b) Port-led development and unlocking potential of India's maritime sector  
(c) Fisheries education  
  
(d) Coastal tourism  
  
When was the National Fisheries Policy introduced?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2018 (c) 2020 (d) 2022  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 68  
  
\=== PAGE 71 ===  
\_..», January 2026  
  
(a)\< TOPIC  
in NEWS  
  
coon  
  
PSLV -— C62  
MISSION FAILURE  
  
Why in News?  
ISRO's PSLV — C62 Mission faces 3rd — Stage Solid Rocket Anomaly disrupts High — Thrust Delivery to Upper Stages,  
Impacting Intended Satellite Orbital Injection.  
ISRO's lst 2026 Launch, PSLV — C62, scheduled for Liftoff from Sriharikota (Andhra Pradesh).  
PSLV—C62 Failure, Following PSLV — C61 Setback in 8 Months.  
  
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle  
e Also called Workhorse of ISRO.  
e Type: 3“—Generation 4—Stage Medium — Lift Launch Vehicle  
o Payload Capability: Up to 1750 kg to 600 km Sun—Synchronous Orbit  
e =I" Launched in 1993.  
o Achieved 1" Success in 1994 with IRS—P2 Remote Sensing Satellite Insertion.  
¢ Uses Solid Propellants in 1" and 3" Stages, Liquid Propellants in 2" (Vikas Engine) and 4" Stages.  
oI" Indian Launcher with Liquid Stages i  
e Notable PSLV Missions: Chandrayaan — 1, Mars Orbiter Mission (Mangalyaan), Aditya—L1, AstroSat, World  
H Record: 104 Satellites in One Launch (2017) i  
  
Payload Details  
  
e EOS -—NI Satellite (Anvesha): Hyperspectral Imaging Satellite developed for DRDO's Strategic Applications.  
o Purpose: Strengthen Space — based Earth Observation and Monitoring  
o Orbit Intended: Sun Synchronous Orbit  
  
e KID (Kestrel Initial Demonstrator): Developed by a Spanish Startup  
o Type: Small — scale Re — Entry Vehicle Prototype  
  
o Mission: Atmospheric Re — Entry and Splashdown in  
Mission Overview  
  
South Pacific Ocean :  
: e Launch Vehicle: PSLV—62  
  
o Trajectory: Separate Re — Entry Path (Not SSO)  
  
| © Mission Type: Earth Observation + |  
e Other Co — Passenger Satellites: Total 18 (Domestic + i ssron type a servarion i  
  
International) Commercial Payloads from India, Mauritius,  
  
Luxembourg, UAE, Singapore, Europe, and the US  
  
o Bengaluru — based OrbitAID Aerospace's AayulSAT:  
India's 1" On-Orbit Satellite Refuelling Payload.  
  
o Orbit: Sun Synchronous Orbit  
  
i Commercial Mission  
i © Flight Number: 64" PSLV Flight  
  
o 9" dedicated Commercial Mission by  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 69  
  
\=== PAGE 72 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Space  
  
Indian Space Policy 2023  
  
Government's Plan to let Private Enterprises carry out End —to — End Activities from Launching Satellites and  
  
Rockets into Space to operating Earth Stations  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
ISRO’s Major Launch Vehicles  
  
Next Generation Launch Vehicle  
  
India’s Other Launch Vehicles  
  
Maximum Payload Capability: 30 Tonnes  
  
o 3 Times compared to  
LVM3.  
  
Cost: 1.5 Times  
  
(Compared to LVM3).  
  
Reusable and Green  
  
The Future of  
  
Space Travel  
  
Next Generation Launch  
Vehicle (NGLV)  
Propulsion Systems.  
New Re-usable  
Demonstrated with 3 ehicle  
Flights (D1, D2 & D3)  
with a target of 96  
Months (8 years) for  
Completion of  
  
x : d capability at  
1.5X cost & also have reusability  
  
Total fund approved is z  
  
Enable national & commercial  
missions like Human spaceflight  
missions to Bharat tariksh  
  
Development Phase.  
Total Fund: Rs 8240  
  
Crore  
  
Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV): 1° Rocket  
  
developed by ISRO.  
  
o Followed by Augmented Satellite  
Launch Vehicle (ASLV).  
  
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV): 1\*  
  
successful launch was in 1994.  
  
o 1\* Indian Launch Vehicle to be equipped  
with Liquid Stages.  
  
o Launched Chandrayaan — 1 and MoM.  
  
Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle  
  
(GSLV): To carry Heavier Satellites much  
  
deeper into Space.  
  
o Mk-\~lIIl Versions have made ISRO  
entirely Self — Sufficient.  
  
Small Satellite Launch Vehicle  
  
Agnibaan (SOrTeD)  
  
Developed by ISRO in 2024.  
  
o 3" Flight Placed EOS — 08 and SR — 0 Demosat into LEO.  
\= In 2022, SSLV — D1 (carrying EOS — 02 and AzaadiSat) was a  
  
Failure.  
  
\= With SSLV — D2 in 2023, ISRO tasted success.  
  
Type: 3 — Stage Launch Vehicle.  
  
Launch Site: Satish Dhawan Space Centre (Sriharikota)  
  
Producing Body: NSIL  
  
Significance  
  
o Seamless Launch of Small Satellites  
  
o Suited for launching Multiple Microsatellites  
  
o Shift Burden from PSLV  
  
RHUMI - 1: India’s 1 Reusable Hybrid Rocket  
  
Developed By: Space Zone India  
Launched in collaboration with Martin Group.  
Carried 3 Cube Satellites and 50 PICO Satellites.  
  
SOrTeD stands for SubOrbital Technology  
  
Demonstrator  
  
Type: 2 — Stage Rocket  
  
Developed By: Agnikul Cosmos  
  
o Founded in 2017.  
  
o Founder: Srinath Ravichandran, Moin  
SPM, Satya Chakravarthy  
  
o 1“ company in India to sign an  
agreement with ISRO under IN — SPACe  
  
World’s 1“ Rocket with Fully 3D — Printed  
  
Engine  
  
India’s 1° Semi — Cryogenic Engine —  
  
powered Rocket Launch  
  
Launch Site: Dhanush (India’s 1\* Privately  
  
Developed Launchpad)  
  
Mechazilla Starship Pushpak / RLV LEX - 03  
Nickname for Large 400 ft Rocket — e 2-Stage Heavy Lift Vehicle. e Reusable Launch Vehicle —  
catching Structure e Largest Rocket ever built. Landing Experiment.  
  
Designed to catch Super Heavy Booster in | ¢  
Mid Air as it returns to Earth.  
  
Developed By: SpaceX beyond.  
  
e Developed By: SpaceX  
  
Designed to carry Crew and Cargo |  
to Earth Orbit, Moon, Mars and  
  
India's 1‘ Uncrewed Flying  
Testbed.  
e Developed By: ISRO  
  
NOTE: Falcon — 9 Rocket is World’s 1“ Reusable, 2 — Stage Rocket designed and manufactured by SpaceX.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@  
  
70  
  
\=== PAGE 73 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Space  
  
Indian Space Research Organisation  
  
e India's National Space Agency.  
e Formerly known as Indian National Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR)  
o Set up in 1962 by then-Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru on recommendation of scientist Vikram Sarabhai (Father of  
Indian Space Programme).  
  
o Renamed as ISRO in 1969.  
e Serves as Principal Research and Development Arm of Department of Space. “= =\~  
o Overseen By: Prime Minister of India  
o Chief Executive: Chairman of ISRO :  
Sai|isra  
  
e Chairman: Dr. V. Narayanan (1 1")  
e HQ: Bengaluru (Karnataka)  
  
ISRO’s Major Missions and Achievements  
  
e Aryabhata: India's 1\* Satellite  
o Launched By: Interkosmos (Soviet Space Agency) in 1975.  
e¢ RS\~—1 (Rohini Series — I): 1“ Satellite launched by ISRO  
o In 1980, onboard SLV — 3, making India 7 Country to undertake Orbital Launches.  
o 3” Indian Satellite to reach orbit as Bhaskara had been launched from USSR in 1979.  
e APPLE (1981): 1 Indigenous Experimental Communication Satellite launched into GTO.  
e INSAT — 1B (1983): 1‘ Successful Satellite of INSAT for Communication, Broadcasting Meteorology.  
e Chandrayaan — 1 (2008): 1° Probe to verify Presence of Water on the Moon.  
¢ Mars Orbiter Mission (2013): 1“ Asian Spacecraft to enter Martian Orbit.  
o India 1\* Country to succeed at this on its 1°\* Attempt.  
© Cryogenic GSLV Rocket: India 6" Country to have full launch capabilities.  
e LVM3: New Heavier — Lift Launcher  
o Introduced in 2014 for Heavier Satellites and Future Human Space Missions.  
  
Extra Shots  
Pushpak: Reusable Landing  
  
e = Chandrayaan — 3 eB" Moon Mission): India achieved its 1“ Soft Landing on an Vehicle  
  
Extraterrestrial Body. Kulasekarapattinam (Tamil  
Nadu): 2" Rocket Launch Port.  
  
o 1“ Nation to successfully land a spacecraft near Lunar South Pole with  
ISRO's.  
e Aditya — L1: India’s 1‘ Sun Probe, aboard a PSLV — C57 on Sep 2, 2023.  
o ISRO’s 2"\! Astronomy Observatory — class Mission after AstroSat (2015).  
e X-ray Polarimeter Satellite (XPoSat): ISRO’s 1\* Polarimetry Mission launched on PSLV — C58.  
o World’s 2™ Satellite — based Mission dedicated to making X — ray Polarimetry Measurements.  
\= In 2021, NASA launched Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE)  
e Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System: Known as NavIC (Navigation in Indian Constellation)  
o Designed to provide Position Information in Indian Region and 1500 km around Indian Mainland.  
  
Organisation Structure  
  
Antrix Corporation (1992) NewSpace India Limited IN -— SPACe  
  
© Marketing Arm of ISRO. e Established in 2019. e Indian National Space Promotion and  
  
© — Objective: To promote ISRO's |\* Commercial Arm of ISRO Authorisation Centre  
Products, Services and e For Producing, Assembling, e To Enable and Facilitate Participation of  
Technologies. Integrating Launch Vehicle Private Players  
  
© HQ: Bangalore e HQ: Bangalore e HQ: Ahmedabad  
  
Skill — Up: National Space Day, NaVIC, Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, ISRO's Upcoming Missions, Indian Space Policy 2023  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 71  
  
\=== PAGE 74 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Space  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
1\. What specific anomaly occurred during the PSLV-C62 mission?  
  
(a) 1st Stage Liquid Engine Failure  
(c) 4th Stage Ignition Failure  
  
2\. From where was PSLV-C62 scheduled for liftoff?  
(a) Thumba, Kerala  
(c) Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh  
  
3\. What was PSLV-C62 in terms of ISRO's launch schedule?  
  
(a) Last launch of 2025  
(c) Second launch of 2026  
  
(b) 3rd Stage Solid Rocket Anomaly  
d) Payload Separation Malfunction  
  
\~  
  
(b) Balasore, Odisha  
(d) Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala  
  
(b) First launch of 2026  
) Mid-year launch of 2026  
  
4\. How many months after PSLV-C61 setback did PSLV-C62 failure occur?  
  
(a) 6 months (b) 8 months (c) 10 months (d) 12 months  
5\. What is the full name of EOS-N1 satellite?  
  
(a) Aryabhata (b) Anvesha (c) AstroSat (d) Aditya  
6\. For which organization was EOS-N1 satellite developed?  
  
(a) ISRO (b) DRDO (c) HAL (d) BARC  
  
7\. What type of imaging satellite is EOS-N1?  
(a) Multispectral Imaging Satellite  
(c) Hyperspectral Imaging Satellite  
  
8\. What does KID stand for?  
(a) Kinetic Initial Demonstrator  
(c) Kerbal Initial Demonstrator  
  
9\. Which country developed the KID payload?  
(a) France (b) Germany  
  
0\. Where was KID intended to splash down?  
(a) Indian Ocean (b) Atlantic Ocean  
  
(a) 12 (b) 15  
  
(a) Skyroot Aerospace (b) Agnikul Cosmos  
  
3\. | What is unique about AayulSAT?  
(a) India's first weather satellite  
(c) India's first navigation satellite  
  
(b) Synthetic Aperture Radar Satellite  
(d) Optical Imaging Satellite  
  
(b) Kestrel Initial Demonstrator  
(d) Kinetic Impact Device  
  
(c) Spain (d) Italy  
  
(c) South Pacific Ocean (d) Arabian Sea  
  
1\. How many total co-passenger satellites were on PSLV-C62?  
  
(c) 18 (d) 20  
  
2\. Which Bengaluru-based company developed AayulSAT?  
  
(c) OrbitAID Aerospace (d) Pixxel Space  
  
(b) India's first on-orbit satellite refuelling payload  
(d) India's first communication satellite  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 72  
  
\=== PAGE 75 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Space  
  
14\.  
  
15\.  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What orbit was intended for EOS-N1 satellite?  
(a) Geostationary Orbit (b) Low Earth Orbit  
(c) Sun Synchronous Orbit (d) Highly Elliptical Orbit  
  
Which countries\! payloads were included as co-passengers? (Select the correct combination)  
(a) India, China, Russia, Japan  
  
(b) India, Mauritius, Luxembourg, UAE, Singapore, Europe, US  
  
(c) India, UK, France, Germany  
  
(d) India, Australia, New Zealand, Canada  
  
What was the first successful Indian launch vehicle?  
(a) ASLV (b) PSLV (c) SLV (d) GSLV  
  
When was PSLV's first successful launch?  
(a) 1992 (b) 1994 (c) 1996 (d) 1998  
  
What significant feature made PSLV the first Indian launch vehicle?  
(a) Equipped with solid stages (b) Equipped with liquid stages  
(c) Equipped with cryogenic stages (d) Equipped with reusable stages  
  
Which ISRO missions were launched by PSLV?  
(a) Mangalyaan and Chandrayaan-3 (b) Chandrayaan-1 and Mars Orbiter Mission (MoM)  
(c) Aditya-L1 and Gaganyaan (d) XPoSat and AstroSat only  
  
What is the purpose of GSLV?  
(a) To launch small satellites (b) To carry heavier satellites much deeper into space  
(c) To launch reusable vehicles (d) To launch planetary missions only  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key y  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 73  
  
\=== PAGE 76 ===  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
Why in News?  
Key Institutional Mechanisms of National Sports Governance Act come into force from | January 2026.  
Union Government notifies National Sports Governance (National Sports Bodies) Rules 2026 to enhance Transparency,  
  
Inclusivity and Accountability in Sports Administration.  
  
Salient Features  
  
National Sports Board: Apex Regulatory Body for Sports ;\~  
  
Governance in India.  
o Powers & Functions: Grant, Renew, Suspend or Cancel  
Recognition of National Sports Bodies.  
\= Maintain a Central Register of Recognized Sports  
Bodies.  
\= Coordinate with International Sports Bodies and  
Domestic Federations.  
o Designed to curb Politicisation, Arbitrariness and Lack of  
Accountability in Sports Administration.  
  
o Composition: Chairperson and 2 Other Members  
  
\=, TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
NATIONAL SPORTS  
GOVERNANCE ACT  
  
National Sports Bodies  
National Olympic Committee: Sole |  
Governing Body for Olympic Sports in India. :  
National Paralympic Committee: Sole  
Governing Body for Paralympic Sports.  
  
Other Bodies: National Sports Federations  
& Regional Sports Federations i  
  
o TermofMembers: 3 years or up to 65 years of age, whichever is earlier.  
  
National Sports Tribunal: Established for Independent, Speedy, Effective and Cost — Efficient Resolution of Sports-related  
  
Disputes.  
  
o Headed By: A Sitting or Retired Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice ofa High Court.  
  
\= 2 Other Members: Experts in Sports, Public  
Administration or Law.  
o Jurisdiction: Election Disputes, Athlete Selection Issues,  
Governance Matters  
  
\= Appellate Authority: Supreme Court Only  
  
o Excluded Jurisdiction: Disputes arising during Major  
International Sporting (Olympic Games, Paralympic  
Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games) and  
Doping — related Disputes (Fall exclusively under  
National Anti-Doping Act 2022).  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@  
  
National Sports Board (Search — cum —  
Selection Committee)  
  
Function: Selection and Appointment of  
Members of National Sports Board i  
Chairperson: Cabinet Secretary :  
Members: Secretary (Ministry of Youth Affairs  
& Sports), 1 Person with experience in Sports  
Administration, 2 Recipients of National i  
  
Sports Awards.  
  
TA  
  
\=== PAGE 77 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
e National Sports Election Panel: Central Roster of Experienced Former Election Officials.  
o Mandated to oversee Free, Fair and Transparent Elections in Sports Federations.  
o Addresses Long = Standing Issues of Conflict of Interest and Factionalism.  
e Accountability and Transparency  
o Public Authority Status: Recognized Sports Bodies deemed “Public Authorities” under RTI Act 2005.  
  
o Financial Oversight: Accounts of National Sports Board to be audited by Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
  
National Sports Governance (National Sports Bodies) Rules, 2026  
  
Every National Sports Body must have General Body and Executive Committee. H  
o Composition of General Body: Mandatory inclusion of At least 4 Sportspersons of Outstanding Merits i  
(Minimum 25 years of Age) and 50% of SOMs must be Women. i  
  
o = Women's Representation in Executive Committee: At least 4 Women Members in Executive Committee.  
  
National Sports Election Panel: Responsible for Overseeing and Conducting Elections of National Sports  
Bodies. :  
o Must consist of At Least 20 Members at All Times.  
  
Disqualification Criteria: A Person shall be Disqualified from holding office if Convicted by a Court of Law  
and Sentenced to Imprisonment. i  
  
India's Initiative to promote Sport  
  
e Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Mansukh Mandaviya)  
  
e Fit India Movement (2019): Government Initiative encouraging Mass  
Participation in Fitness Activities. Khelo India Games  
© Bihar will host 7" Khelo India }  
  
e —Khelo India (2017): For Identification and Development of Athletes at . i  
Youth Games and Khelo India Para :  
  
Grassroots and Elite Levels.  
  
Games in 2025.  
  
e Khelo India Rising Talent Identification (KIRTI) Programme (2024): o —-Host 2024: Tamil Nadu i  
Aimed at School Children between 9 and 18 years to hunt talent from © 5" Khelo India Winter Games 2025 i  
Every Nook and Corner of India. will be held in Ladakh and J\&K in |  
  
2025\.  
  
e National Sports Policy: To enhance Quality of Sports Training, Promote  
  
Participation and Increase Number of Athletes competing Internationally.  
  
e Target Olympic Podium Scheme (TOPS 2014): To Identify and Support  
Athletes with potential to win medals at Olympic Games.  
  
Related Facts  
o Provides Financial Assistance for Training, Coaching, Participation ie Olympics Cancelled due to WWI: ;  
in International Competitions. Berlin (1916)  
e Mission Olympic Cell: A Body within Ministry of Youth Affairs and © Olympics Cancelled due to WWII:  
Sports to monitor and provide support for Athletes' Training and Tokyo + Helsinki (1940), London i  
  
Preparation for Olympics under TOPS.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 75  
  
\=== PAGE 78 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
Extra Shot  
  
Indian Olympic Association: 1927 | President: PT Usha| HQ: New Delhi  
  
WADA (World Anti — Doping Agency) 2023 Report: India had Highest Positivity Rate for Banned Substances  
  
among Major Nations.  
  
o Ranked 2" globally in Doping Cases among Minors (After Russia).  
  
Athletics Integrity Unit: India is 2" in Doping Offences in Track and Field (after Kenya).  
  
Anti — Doping Frameworks  
  
National Anti — Doping Agency 2005 | Monitors Doping Control Programs | Under Ministry of Youth Affairs &  
Sports  
National Anti — Doping Act, 2022 1“ Standalone Anti — Doping Law compliance with WADA Code.  
Powers for Search, Seizure, Disciplinary Action.  
UNESCO International Convention 2005 | Urges Nations to Enact Laws to Eliminate Drug Use in Athletics | Paris |  
Against Doping in Sport 191 Countries (including India)  
Court of Arbitration for Sport 1984 | By International Olympic Committee | To provide a Fair and Quick Way to  
  
resolve disagreements in Sports World | Switzerland  
  
India's Performance in International Events  
  
Paris Olympics ended with India securing 6 Medals (1 Silver and 5 Bronze) to place 71" in Medals Tally  
  
Manu Bhaker won Bronze in Women's 10 Metre Air Pistol Event and Mixed 10 Metre Air Pistol Event.  
o —-1"Indian Woman to win a medal in Shooting.  
  
o 1" Indian and Woman to win 2 Olympic Medals in a Single Edition.  
  
Aman Sehrawat: Youngest Indian to win an Individual Olympic Medal, having secured a Bronze Medal at 2024  
Summer Olympics in Paris.  
D Gukesh: World's Youngest Chess Champion (18 Yrs), defeating China's Ding Liren in 2024 FIDE World  
Chess Championship held in Singapore. :  
o 2" Indian Grandmaster to win FIDE World Chess Championship, after Viswanathan Anand  
  
Praveen Kumar (High Jump) won Gold at 2024 Paris Paralympics.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 76  
  
\=== PAGE 79 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
From when did the Key Institutional Mechanisms of National Sports Governance Act come into force?  
(a) 1 January 2025 (b) 1 January 2026 (c) 1 April 2026 (d) 1 July 2026  
  
What are the National Sports Governance Rules 2026 designed to enhance?  
(a) Athlete performance only  
  
(b) Infrastructure development  
  
(c) Transparency, Inclusivity and Accountability in Sports Administration  
(d) International participation  
  
What is the National Sports Board?  
(a) Athletes' welfare body (b) Apex Regulatory Body for Sports Governance in India  
(c) International sports coordination body (d) Sports infrastructure development agency  
  
How many members does the National Sports Board have including the Chairperson?  
(a) 2 (b)3 (c)5 (d)7  
  
What is the term of members of the National Sports Board?  
(a) 2 years or up to 60 years of age (b) 3 years or up to 65 years of age  
(c) 4 years or up to 65 years of age (d) 5 years or up to 70 years of age  
  
Who heads the National Sports Tribunal?  
  
(a) Sports Minister  
  
(b) A sitting or retired Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of a High Court  
(c) Olympic medal winner  
  
(d) Sports administrator  
  
How many other members besides the head does the National Sports Tribunal have?  
(a) 1 (b)2 (c)3 (d)4  
  
What is the appellate authority for National Sports Tribunal decisions?  
(a) High Court (b) National Sports Board  
(c) Supreme Court Only (d) President of India  
  
Which disputes are excluded from National Sports Tribunal's jurisdiction?  
(a) Selection disputes only  
  
(b) Election disputes only  
  
(c) Major International Sporting Events and Doping-related Disputes  
  
(d) Financial disputes only  
  
Under which act do doping-related disputes fall?  
(a) National Sports Governance Act (b) National Anti-Doping Act 2022  
(c) Sports Authority Act (d) WADA Compliance Act  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 77  
  
\=== PAGE 80 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
20\.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What is the National Sports Election Panel composed of?  
  
(a) Active election commissioners  
(c) Sports administrators  
  
(b) Central Roster of Experienced Former Election Officials  
(d) Athletes' representatives  
  
Under which act are recognized sports bodies deemed "Public Authorities"?  
  
(a) Information Act 2000  
(c) Governance Act 2010  
  
Who audits the accounts of the National Sports Board?  
  
(a) Private auditors  
(c) Comptroller and Auditor-General of India  
  
Who is the current Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports?  
  
(a) Anurag Thakur (b) Kiren Rijiju  
  
When was the Fit India Movement launched?  
(a) 2017 (b) 2018  
  
When was the Khelo India initiative launched?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2016  
  
What does KIRTI stand for?  
(a) Khelo India Rising Talent Initiative  
(c) Khelo India Recruitment and Training Initiative  
  
When was the KIRTI Programme launched?  
(a) 2022 (b) 2023  
  
What age group does the KIRTI Programme target?  
(a) 6 to 15 years (b) 8 to 16 years  
  
(b) RTI Act 2005  
(d) Transparency Act 2015  
  
(b) Ministry of Finance  
  
(d) Sports Ministry auditors  
  
(c) Mansukh Mandaviya (d) Arjun Munda  
  
(c) 2019 (d) 2020  
  
(c) 2017 (d) 2018  
  
(b) Khelo India Rising Talent Identification  
(d) Khelo India Regional Talent Identification  
  
(c) 2024 (d) 2025  
  
(c) 9 to 18 years (d) 10 to 20 years  
  
When was the Target Olympic Podium Scheme (TOPS) launched?  
  
(a) 2012 (b) 2014  
  
(c) 2016 (d) 2018  
  
FOLLOW USNOW OO@O@ 78  
  
\=== PAGE 81 ===  
‘\_— January 2026  
  
9 (as TOPIC  
p inNEWS  
—O  
  
o-CW)  
  
MISCELLANEOUS  
  
INTERN ONAL NEWS  
  
UN Security Council  
  
Bahrain, Colombia, Democratic Republic of Congo, Latvia and Liberia UN Security Council members  
  
elected as Non— Permanent UNSC Members for Two — Year Term.  
  
ee sp  
e Established in 1945 through UN Charter. 5 | — o cS  
permanent us UK  
  
China  
  
Russia France  
  
e Permanent Members (P5): China, France, Russia, USA, UK. 10 Africa eh  
o Non-— Permanent Members: 10 Members elected for 2 — Year non-permanent  
  
¢ One of 6 Principal Organs of United Nations. members  
  
¢ Purpose: Maintaining International Peace and Security.  
  
Latin America  
i  
members ee  
  
Terms by UN General Assembly.  
  
China  
ance Western  
  
Russia Europe  
  
on Countries threatening Global Security, Authorize Use of Force reo Ba  
  
¢ Functions: Authorizes Peacekeeping Missions, Imposes Sanctions  
  
@ Permanent members-5 seats  
  
Eastern  
in cases of International Conflict. a  
\> Each year, the General Assembly elects five non-permanent members for  
  
e Secretary General: Antonio Guterres a two-year term. The 10 non-permanent seats are distributed on a  
  
regional basis.  
e HQ:New York  
The UN Chart sts the prir ibility  
U N S e Cc u r i ity Cc fe) u n Cc i l ( U N S C) for maintaining international peace and security  
  
to the UNSC  
About Headquarters First Session Membership Presidency  
One of the 6 principal New York City 17 January 1946 at + 15members -5 Permanent Members (P5),10 + Rotates every  
organs of UN; Church House, Non-Permanent Members elected for month among the  
established in 1945 by Westminster, London ‘two-year terms (5 elected each year) 15 members  
UN Charter + PS-the US, the UK, Russia, France and China + India’s Presidency  
for year 2022 -  
December  
Voting Powers UNSC Committees/Resolutions  
. semper vote Terrorism Non-Proliferation Committee  
\+ \\Menibere of UN geno + Resolution 1373 (Counter Terrorism Committee) + Resolution 1540 (against nuclear, chemical and biological  
  
membership of UNSC + Resolution 1267 (Da‘esh and Al Qaeda Committee) weapons)  
  
participate without vote  
  
\+ Arguments for a permanent seat: Germany, India and Japan) which  
  
\+ 43 peacekeeping missions »  
\+ Active participation in formulating Human Rights Declaration (UDHR) » beeaeaaneitaanateer te  
  
\+ India's population, territorial size, GDP, economic potential, cultural  
diversity, political system etc.  
  
Uniting for Consensus (UfC) Movement Major Challenges in UNSC  
  
India and UNSC  
\+ Served 7 times as non-permanent member; elected for the 8" time for 2021-22; ac) S) G4  
advocates for a permanent seat Group of 4 countries (Brazil,  
  
\+ Informally known as the Coffee Club + Usual UN rules don't apply to UNSC deliberations; no records of  
\+ Countries oppose the expansion Permanent Seats of UNSC meetings kept  
\+ Prime movers of the club - italy, Spain, Australia, Canada, South + Powerplay in UNSC; anachronistic veto powers of PS  
  
Korea, Argentina and Pakistan + Deep polarisation among P5; frequent divisions end up blocking  
\+ Italy and Spain are opposed to Germany's bid; Pakistan - India's, key decisions  
  
bid; Argentina - Brazil's bid and Australia - Japan's bid + Inadequate representation of many regions among of the world  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 79  
  
\=== PAGE 82 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
Pax Silica  
  
India set to join US — led “Pax Silica” Initiative to Strengthen Trusted Global Technology Supply Chains.  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
A United States — led Multilateral Framework focused on building a Secure, Resilient and Innovation — oriented Global  
  
Technology Ecosystem.  
  
Designed to Counter Vulnerabilities in Critical Technology Supply Chains and Reduce Over — Dependence on Coercive or  
  
Unreliable Sources.  
  
Scope of Initiative: Semiconductors and AI Infrastructure, Critical Minerals and Energy Inputs, Advanced Manufacturing  
  
and High-End Hardware, Compute and Data Logistics  
  
Mineral Security Partnership / Minerals Security Partnership Finance Network  
Critical Minerals Alliance (2024)  
  
US — led Alliance launched in 2022. ote, of Minerals Security Partner 1  
\*\* Objective: To facilitate Public and oint Financing Body designed to fund Critica  
  
: . . Minerals Projects.  
Private Sector Investments in strategic Members: 14 C ies (includi di d  
Critical Minerals Projects to help build embers: 14 Countries (including India) an  
  
. : European Commission.  
More Secure, Diverse and Sustainable P  
  
Critical Mineral Supply Chains. Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technology  
(iCET)  
  
Members: 14 Countries (Including  
In 2022, India and US launched iCET to collaborate on  
  
India) and European Union.  
» India is Only Developing country to Semiconductors, Al and Wireless Communication,  
mainly for Defence and Security.  
  
become a part of MSP.  
  
P National Cr Critical Minerals Mission  
  
” Aim: Encourage Indian PSUs and Private Sector Companies to acquire Critical Mineral Assets  
Abroad and enhance Trade with Resource — rich Countries.  
  
Key Objectives: Enhancing Domestic Exploration, Reducing Import Dependence, Developing  
Processing and Recycling Capabilities, Overseas Mineral Acquisitions, Regulatory and Financial  
Support  
  
Cost: Rs 16300 Crore & 318000 Crore is expected to be invested by PSUs and Private Sector.  
Duration: From FY 2024 — 25 to 2030 — 31  
  
Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Mines(G Kishan Reddy)  
  
4  
  
“Miners and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 1957 \[ime | Jase\!) Uthiom mining = (Development and Regulation) Act 1957  
  
enables Mining Concessions for Critical Minerals  
  
\> Total Critical Minerals recognised in India: 30  
  
Khanii Bidesh India Ltd (KABIL): Responsible for Identifying and  
  
Acquiring Overseas Asserts related to Critical Minerals.  
  
\> KABIL acquires exploration and exclusivity rights for five  
lithium brine blocks in Argentina.  
  
Samudravaan Project aimed at exploring Indian Ocean Seabed  
  
for Critical Minerals  
  
Top 3 Lithium Reserves in World: Bolivia \> Argentina \> Chile  
  
Top 3 Lithium Producers in World: Australia, Chile, China  
  
Lithium Triangle Countries: Argentina, Bolivia and Chile.  
  
India’s 1\* Lithium Site: Salal — Haimana (Reasi, J\&K)  
  
India ‘s 1\* Lithium Auctioned Site: Korba (Chhattisgarh)  
  
fe  
  
R  
cS  
  
RY  
eS  
  
%  
%  
  
fe ate ah  
OO  
  
RY o  
% %  
  
te te te ate ot  
Me te te oe  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FollowusNow B@O@  
  
80  
  
\=== PAGE 83 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Key Objectives  
o Reducing Coercive Dependencies: Minimise Strategic Vulnerabilities arising from Concentrated Supply Chains.  
o Technology Protection: Safeguard Sensitive and Emerging Technologies from Misuse or Strategic Coercion.  
  
o Trusted Digital Infrastructure: Promote Secure, Interoperable and Trusted Technology Networks Among Partner  
  
Countries.  
  
e Member Countries: United States, Japan, South Korea, Singapore, United Kingdom, Israel, Other Like — Minded  
Technology Partners.  
  
India — Germany Strategic Partnership  
  
German Chancellor Friedrich Merz undertakes 1" Official Visit to India, His 1“ Asian Trip in Office.  
  
India and Germany sign Agreements to Boost Cooperation in Defence, Trade, Technology, Mobility, and Indo — Pacific  
Engagement.  
  
German Chancellor (Friedrich Merz)'s Visit in Gandhinagar (Gujarat) marks 25 Years of India — Germany Strategic Partnership  
and Upcoming 75 Years of Diplomatic Relations.  
e Defence and Security Cooperation  
o Joint Declaration of Intent signed to develop a Defence Industrial Cooperation Roadmap.  
\= Focus Areas: Technology Partnerships, Co— Development and Co-Production of Defence Platforms.  
o DRDOpartners with Europe's OCCAR for Eurodrone MALE UAV Programme.  
o Germany expressed intent to participate in Indian Naval Exercise MILAN, Indian Ocean Naval Symposium Activities,  
Air Combat Exercise Tarang Shakti (Largest Multinational Air Exercise in India).  
e Visa and Mobility  
o Germany announced a Visa—Free Transit Facility for Indian Passport Holders.  
o Aims to promote Business Travel & Academic and Professional Exchanges.  
  
e Education, Skills, and People-to-People Ties: Adoption of Indo —- German Comprehensive Roadmap on Higher Education  
focus on Academic Collaboration, Skill Development, Research Mobility.  
India —Germany Relations  
e Bilateral Trade crossed USD 50 Billion in 2024.  
© Germany accounts for over 25% of India's Total Trade with European Union (Largest).  
o. Germany ranked as India's 9 Largest Foreign Direct Investor (2024) i  
e = Green and Sustainable Development Partnership: Aligns Bilateral Climate Cooperation with Paris Climate  
Agreement Goals i  
o. Focus Areas: Renewable Energy, Climate Finance, Sustainable Development  
  
e¢ = Collaboration through platforms such as Indo —German Science and Technology Centre emphasis on Research  
i & development and Industrial Innovation. i  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 81  
  
\=== PAGE 84 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Ministry of Tourism completes 75 Swadesh Darshan Projects,  
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
POLITY & GOVERNANCE  
  
Swadesh Darshan Scheme  
  
Enhancing India's Theme — based and Destination — centric Tourism  
  
Infrastructure. i °  
  
Launched in 2015  
Type: Central Sector Scheme  
Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Tourism °  
  
Objective: Integrated Development of Theme — based Tourist  
Circuits & Enhancing Tourism Infrastructure, Accessibility and  
Visitor Experience  
  
Major Tourist Circuits: Buddhist Circuit, Heritage Circuit, Eco—  
Tourism Circuit, Himalayan Circuit, Coastal Circuit, Desert i °  
Circuit, etc.  
  
Swadesh Darshan 2.0  
Approach: Shift from Circuit — based i  
Infrastructure to Destination — centric, ;  
  
Sustainable and Responsible Tourism ;  
Development  
Focus: Environmental Sustainability, Local }  
  
Community Participation, Enhanced Tourist  
  
Experience  
  
PRASHAD Scheme  
Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual  
Augmentation Drive i  
Focus on Infrastructure Development at  
  
Major Pilgrimage and Heritage Sites  
  
Sub — Schemes under Swadesh Darshan 2.0  
1\. Challenge —based Destination Development  
  
¢ = Thematic Categories: Spiritual Tourism, Culture & Heritage, Vibrant Village Programme, Amrit Dharohar  
  
Sites, Ecotourism.  
  
e Vibrant Village Destinations Identified: Arunachal Pradesh — Kibitho, Himachal Pradesh —  
i Rakchham—Chhitkul, Sikkim —Grathang, Uttarakhand—Jadung and Mana i  
2\. Tribal Homestay Development Guidelines: Development of 1000 Tribal Homestays  
  
e = Objective: Promote Community — based Tourism and Tribal Livelihoods  
  
e = Implemented under Pradhan Mantri Janjatiya Unnat Gram Abhiyan (PM—JUGA)  
  
Objective: Develop Iconic Tourist Centres at Global Standards.  
  
3\. Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment: Provides 50— Year Interest— Free Loans to States  
  
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana|  
  
CAG Audit of PMKVY (2015 —2022) reveals Major Operational, Financial and Governance Shortcomings.  
  
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship) empowers Youth with Short— Term  
  
Skill Training, Upskilling, and Recognition of Prior Learning  
  
Skill—Gap Mismatch: Training Programmes were Not Adequately aligned with Actual Labour Market Needs.  
  
o Skill Courses did Not Consistently reflect Priorities Identified under National Policy for Skill Development and  
  
Entrepreneurship.  
  
Underutilisation of Funds: Nearly 20% of Funds released for State Components remained Unspent.  
  
o Indicates Weak Planning, Absorption Capacity and Centre— State Coordination.  
  
Data Integrity Issues: Skill India Portal suffered from Severe Data Lapses.  
  
o Around 95% of Candidate Records had Invalid or Missing Information (Email IDs, Bank Accounts, etc.).  
  
o Presence of Duplicate Bank Accounts and Identical Photographs.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 82  
  
\=== PAGE 85 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Technical Qualification Lapses: For Job Roles requiring Prior Technical Education, about 85.40% of Certified Candidates  
possessed Only Basic Literacy, undermining Employability.  
  
Fictitious and Ineligible Agencies: Certifications were issued through Non — Existent or Ineligible Training Agencies,  
pointing to Weak Accreditation and Oversight.  
  
Poor Employment Outcomes: Placement Rate only 41%, raising concerns about Scheme's Effectiveness in Improving  
Employability.  
  
Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana  
  
PMMVY marks 9 Years since 2017 Launch.  
  
Launch Year: 2017  
  
Type: Centrally Sponsored Scheme  
o In 2022, PMMVY was incorporated into Mission Shakti, an Umbrella Scheme aimed at Safety, Security and  
  
Empowerment of Women.  
  
Objective: Conditional Cash Transfer Scheme for Pregnant Women & Lactating Mothers to Improve Maternal Health and  
Nutrition.  
  
Target Beneficiaries: Pregnant Women and Lactating Mothers aged 19 Years and Above  
  
Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Women and Child Development  
  
Cash Incentive (PMMVY 1.0) %5,000 for I\* Living Child of Family  
  
Combined Incentive with JSY — Janani Suraksha Yojana Benefit of =1000 — %1500; Average Total Support \~%6,000  
  
PMMVY 2.0 (Second Girl Single Instalment of 26000 for 2™ Girl Child, Promoting Female Child Welfare  
Child)  
  
Conditionality Registration of Pregnancy, at least One Ante — Natal Check — Up, Institutional  
  
Delivery, Post — Natal Care  
  
PRAGATI  
  
PM chairs 50" PRAGATI meeting to Accelerate Mega Project Implementation and Key Welfare Schemes.  
  
Launched: 2015  
  
PRAGATI stands for Pro—Active Governance and Timely Implementation.  
  
Type: 3 — Tier Monitoring and Grievance Redressal Platform  
  
o Prime Minister's Office (PMO): Provides Overall Oversight and Guidance.  
  
o Union Government Secretaries: Coordinate between Central Ministries and Departments.  
o. Chief Secretaries of States: Ensure State —level Implementation and Reporting.  
  
Key Objectives  
  
o Programme Implementation: Facilitates Coordination between Multiple Agencies and Ministries for Smooth Execution  
  
of Schemes and Projects.  
o Project Monitoring: Technology — enabled Platform tracks status of Mega Projects, Timelines and Bottlenecks.  
  
o Grievance Redressal: Integrates with CPGRAMS (Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System) to  
  
address Citizens' Grievances Efficiently.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 83  
  
\=== PAGE 86 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
EC  
  
MY  
  
Global Minimum Tax  
  
OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Framework Agrees on “Side — by — Side Arrangement” for Coordinated Global  
Minimum Tax Implementation.  
  
e Introduced by Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in 2021.  
e Based on Global Anti-— Base Erosion (GIoBE) Model Rules.  
e Framework to impose a Minimum Rate of Taxation on Corporate Income in Most Countries of the world.  
© Seeks to ensure that Large Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) pay At Least a Minimum Effective Tax Rate (15%) in  
Every Jurisdiction where they operate.  
  
¢ Objective: Curb Profit shifting to Low — Tax or No-—Tax Jurisdictions, End “Race to Bottom” in Corporate Tax Rates, Protect  
  
National Tax Bases, especially of Developing Countries.  
e Pillar 1: Reallocation of Profits  
  
o 25% of Profits above a Set Profit Margin of Largest Profitable Multi-National Enterprise will be reallocated to Market  
  
Jurisdictions where MNE's Users and Customers are based.  
o Ensures Fair Taxation in Countries where Economic Activities occur.  
o Includes measures to ensure Dispute Prevention & resolution to address Any Risk of Double Taxation.  
e — Pillar 2: Minimum Corporate Tax  
o Sets a Minimum 15% Tax on Corporate Profit, putting a floor on Tax Competition.  
  
o IfaCompany's Earnings go Untaxed or Lightly Taxed in one of Tax Havens, their Home Country would impose a Top-  
Up Tax that would bring Effective Rate to 15%.  
RBI “State Finances 2025 — 26 Report  
  
RBI Report “State Finances 2025-26” Provides Comprehensive Analysis of Fiscal Health and Budgetary Position of State  
Governments.  
  
e Median Age: \~28 Years  
o Working—Age Population is ata Historic Peak, Creating a Narrow but Critical Window for Growth.  
e Youthful States: High Share of Young Population \> Largest Demographic Dividend Window  
o Examples: Bihar, Uttar Pradesh  
e Intermediate States: Dividend Window Narrowing, Transition Underway.  
o Examples: Telangana, Uttarakhand  
e Ageing States: Crossed Demographic Turning Point; Working-Age Share Declining  
o Examples: Kerala, Tamil Nadu  
¢ —States' Consolidated Fiscal Deficit: Rose to 3.3% of GDP in 2024-25  
e Revenue Expenditure: Declined from 15% of GDP (2020 —21) to 13.3% (2024-25)  
¢ Outstanding Liabilities: Fell to 28% of GDP (March 2024) from 31% in March 2021  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 84  
  
\=== PAGE 87 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
Fiscal Implications for State Finances  
  
Ageing States  
o Shrinking Tax Base: Lower Labour Force Participation — Weaker Long-term Growth  
o Rising Committed Expenditure: Pensions + Interest Payments Rising  
\= Nearly 30% of Social Sector Spending went to Pensions in 2024—25 E  
o Higher Fiscal Stress: Elevated Debt —to—GSDP Ratios and Higher Interest Payments to Revenue Receipts  
  
Youthful States: Risk of Demographic Disaster if Education and Jobs Lag Behind Population Growth.  
  
India Becomes the World's 4" Largest Economy  
  
India overtakes Japan to become World's 4" Largest Economy in Nominal GDP.  
  
India Projected to Surpass Germany by 2027, Becoming 3" Largest Economy with $7.3 Trillion GDP by 2030.  
  
e Economic Size & Ranking  
  
o Nominal GDP: $4.18 Trillion Macrocconen a ten any  
  
ie Per Capita Nominal GDP: $2,820 (Rank: 136")  
¢ = Sectoral Contribution to GDP: Services (55%) |  
  
i \> Industry (27.6%) \> Agriculture (17.7%) i  
  
| ¢ Unemployment Rate: 4.7% (Nov 2025, Lowest  
  
i in Current Data Series) i  
¢ Forex Reserves: $688 Billion (4" Highest)  
  
|e External Debt: $747 Billion  
  
o = Debt—to—GDP Rati  
  
o Global Rank: 4" (Behind United States, China, Germany)  
  
o PPP Basis: 3" Largest Economy with GDP of $17.71  
Trillion  
¢ Growth Performance  
o Fastest-Growing Major Economy globally  
  
o Real GDP Growth: 8.2% in Q2 of FY2025  
  
o Growth Drivers: Strong Domestic Demand, Stable  
  
Private Consumption, Services —led Growth Model  
  
Deflation  
  
Food Prices entered Deflation at—0.2% for 1“ Time since 2014, Signalling Rare Sustained Price Decline.  
  
e Alsoknownas Negative Inflation.  
  
e Refers toa Persistent Fall in General Price Level of Goods and Services in an economy.  
  
e Reflected when Inflation Indices (such as CPI) register Negative Growth over a Sustained Period.  
  
e Major Causes of Deflation  
o Decline inAggregate Demand: Reduced Consumption and Investment leading to Excess Supply.  
o Increased Productivity: Technological Improvements Lower Production Costs, Reducing Prices.  
  
co ©Monetary Policy Shifts: Tight Monetary Conditions or Reduced Money Supply.  
  
O°  
  
Supply — Side Factors (Food Deflation): Improved Harvests, Better Supply Chains or Lower Input Costs.  
  
e Economic Implications  
o Positive: Higher Real Purchasing Power in Short Term.  
  
o ©Negative: Discourage Spending and Investment, Increase Real Debt Burden and Slow Economic Growth if prolonged.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 85  
  
\=== PAGE 88 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
SUMMITS, REPORTS & INDICES  
  
4th Export Preparedness Index  
  
NITI Aayog released 4" Edition of Export Preparedness Index 2024.  
  
A Comprehensive Assessment Tool to evaluate Export Readiness of Indian States and Union Territories.  
Objective: To Identify Strengths, Gaps and Opportunities at Sub— National Level to boost India's Exports.  
Supports India's Goal ofachieving USD 1 Trillion in Merchandise Exports by 2030.  
  
Pillars: Export Infrastructure (20%), Business Ecosystem (40%), Policy & Governance (20%), Export Performance (20%).  
  
Key Findings  
  
Ranking of Large Ranking of Small States,  
Category States North Eastern States & UTs  
  
Leaders (states/ UTs . Maharashtra . Uttarakhand  
demonstrating relatively . Tamil Nadu . Jammu and Kashmir  
high export preparedness) . Gujarat . Nagaland  
  
Challengers (States/UTs . Madhya Pradesh - Meghalaya  
with moderate . Haryana . Ladakh  
preparedness and scope . Kerala . Delhi  
  
for improvement)  
  
Aspirers (States/UTs at . Odisha - Arunachal Pradesh  
early stages of export . Chhattisgarh . Andaman and Nicobar  
  
ecosystem development) . Rajasthan Islands  
. Mizoram  
  
Henley Passport Index 2026  
  
India climbed to 80" Rank (55 Countries) in Henley Passport Index 2026, from 85" in 2025, Reflecting Improved Visa-Free  
Access.  
  
Singapore retained Top Position (192 Countries) as World's Most Powerful Passport, while Japan and South Korea are tied for 2"  
  
Place.  
  
Afghanistan ranked 101°(24 Countries), Bottom of List; followed by Syria and Iraq.  
  
Initiated in 2006 as Henley & Partners Visa Restrictions Index.  
Authoritative Ranking of World Passports based on Destinations Accessible Without a Prior Visa.  
  
Basis of Ranking: Number of Destinations that Passport Holders can access Without a Prior Visa (Visa — Free or Visa — On —  
Arrival).  
  
Based on Data from International Air Transport Association (1945 | Montreal, Canada | Willie Walsh).  
Covers 227 Destinations and 199 Passports.  
  
Published By: Henley & Partners (London)  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 86  
  
\=== PAGE 89 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
ORGANISATIONS & CONVENT  
  
Central Information Commission  
  
Central Information Commission ruled Advocates Cannot Use RTI Act to Seek Case Details on Behalf of Clients, Clarifying  
Legal Scope.  
  
Australia Group marks 40 Years of Coordinated Efforts to  
  
Type: Statutory Body (Right to Information Act 2005)  
  
Objective: To uphold Transparency and Accountability in Public Authorities by ensuring Effective Implementation of RTI  
Act.  
  
Key Functions: Receives and Examines Complaints from Citizens regarding Denial or Obstruction of Information.  
  
o Issues Directions to Public Authorities for Disclosure of Information and Compliance with provisions of RTI Act.  
Composition: One Chief Information Commissioner (Raj Kumar Goyal) & up to 10 Information Commissioners.  
Appointed By: President of India  
  
o Onrecommendation ofa High-level Committee comprising Prime Minister, Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha, One  
  
Union Cabinet Minister nominated by Prime Minister  
  
ABOUT PUBLIC AUTHORITY UNDER THE ACT  
  
\* Enacted on June 15, 2005. \* Authority: Established by the Constitution or under a law.  
  
\* Allows Indian citizens to \* Body: Constituted by a notification or order issued by the  
\* Institution: Owned, controlled, or substantially financed by  
by public authorities. the gavernment.  
\* Information pertaining to private bodies: Includes records  
  
|  
|  
|  
|  
|  
access information held } a lrbaail igesattepe  
|  
\!  
\!  
\!  
  
submitted by a private body to the government.  
RIGHT TO @  
  
TIMELY RIGHT TO APPELLATE  
INFORMATION resale APPEAL \<= AUTHORITY =  
  
Right to citizens a For both the Dissatisfied  
  
RTI  
  
of India to seek applicant and applicant can file an  
  
ACT | Information from bar we dee the PIO. appeal with the  
the public authority. appellate authority.  
  
BSSSCSSSSSSSSSSSSSS TERETE SSS SSSS SESS SSSSESS SESS SSE SESE SESE ESSERE ESEeeeesesesesss:  
Public authorities To pr pte To safeguard Constitution of the  
must disclose matin, 1 those who expose CIC at center and  
their information. SOCtRtS, porraic corruption. SIC at the state.  
cabinet cabinet eno\!  
  
DISCLOSURE Hemme EXEMPT & WHISTLEBLOWER INFORMATIE  
OBLIGATIONS “IONS PROTECTION COMMISSIONS  
  
Nuclear Non — Proliferation Treaty  
  
i e Adopted: 1968 | In force: 1970 | Extended |  
i Indefinitely: 1995  
i ¢ — Classifies Member States into Two Categories i  
  
Founded: 1985, in response to Use of Chemical Weapons Based on Nuclear Status as of January 1, 1967.  
  
during Iran-Iraq War. i e = Members: 191 (including P5) i  
i o \~©Non-—Signatories: India, Pakistan, Israel, |  
South Sudan i  
o Withdrawn: North Korea (2003)  
  
Australia Group  
  
Prevent Chemical and Biological Weapons Proliferation.  
  
Nature: Informal Multilateral Arrangement; Not Legally  
Binding.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 87  
  
\=== PAGE 90 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
e Functions as a Multilateral Export Control Regime to Minimize Risk of Proliferation of Chemical and Biological Weapons.  
  
e Members: 42 Countries + European Union (India joined in 2018).  
  
Multilateral Export Control Regimes  
  
ie Nuclear Suppliers Group (1975): Regulates Nuclear — related Exports to prevent Nuclear Weapons  
; Proliferation. i  
  
e Missile Technology Control Regime (1987): Prevents Spread of Missile and Drone Technology capable of  
delivering WMDs.  
  
Wassenaar Arrangement (1996): Controls Conventional Arms and Dual Use Goods / Technologies.  
  
PERSONS, PLACES & AWARDS IN NEWS  
  
Piprahwa Relics  
  
PM inaugurates “The Light & the Lotus” Exposition, Celebrating Repatriation of Lord Buddha's Piprahwa Gems Relics after 127  
Years.  
  
e Unearthed in 1898 at a Buddhist Stupa in Piprahwa (Uttar Pradesh, near India — Nepal Border) by British civil engineer  
William Claxton Peppé.  
  
e Archaeological evidence links site to ancient Kapilavastu (Place where Gautama Buddha spent his Early Life Before  
Renunciation).  
  
e Under Indian Treasure Trove Act 1878, British Crown claimed Relics.  
  
o Buddha's Bone Relics were gifted to King Rama V of Siam (Thailand), while most gems went to Indian Museum,  
  
Kolkata (Now preserved at National Museum, New Delhi).  
  
GAUTAM BUDDHA  
  
nation  
  
ORIGIN  
  
a) PARENTS @ © 6" century BC, based on the teachings of  
4 saorm a Siddhartha (563 BC) 4 Father - elected ruler of Kapitvastu; ont Sa  
4 é headed Shakya republican clan MAIN FEATURES  
Kapilava Mother - princess from Koshalan dynasty © Essence - Attainment of enlightenment (Nibbana)  
  
© Supreme Deity - None BUDDHISM REJECTS  
PRINCIPLES ‘© Authenticity of Vedas  
  
© Avoid the extremes; follow Madhyam Marg ‘© Concept of soul (atman) (unlike Jainism)  
  
vill 1th)  
ne 0 Pa re ; MAJOR BUDDHIST TEXTS  
Indl lc component (everyone la eras: 6 i  
rononabla for et oon eee © Sutta Pitaka (main teachings of Buddha - Dhamma  
Pri © Vinaya Pitaka (rules of conduct for monksy/muns)  
saa ‘© Abhidhamma Pitaka (philosophical analysis)  
  
Duldcha (euthegra) © Other imp texts - Divyavadana, Dipavamsa  
Samudya (cause of suffering) Mahavamsa, Milind Panha  
  
Nirodha (suffering could be ended)  
Atthanga Magga (8-fold path to achieve this) Sudhh  
© 8-Fold Pat\!  
  
STANT EVENTS ©  
  
“The Great Departure | Rese sermon  
  
as  
  
has been addressed as  
  
CONTEMPORARIES @  
  
© Vardhaman Mahavira  
© Bimbisara  
  
© Ajatshatru  
  
1 (first sermon)  
Li (Last sermon)  
  
jara (death place (487 BC))  
  
First Ajatashatru Rajgriha  
Second Kalashoka Vaishali  
  
Third Ashoka Patliputra  
  
Fourth Kanishka  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
Mahakashyapa  
Sabbakami  
  
Mogaliputra  
  
Kundalban Keshmir i Vasumitra  
  
88  
  
\=== PAGE 91 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Miscellaneous  
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose  
  
Parakram Diwas (23 January) observed to commemorate Birth Anniversary of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose.  
  
Born on 23 January (Parakram Diwas) 1897 in Cuttack, Odisha.  
  
Considered Swami Vivekananda as his Spiritual Guru.  
  
Indian Nationalist Leader who fought for Complete Independence from British Rule.  
  
President of Indian National Congress in 1938 (Haripura) and 1939 (Tripuri); resigned due to ideological differences.  
o Advocated Direct Action against British Colonialism rather than Constitutional Reform.  
  
Founded “The Forward Bloc” Party to consolidate Political Left.  
  
Reached Japan-—controlled Singapore in 1943, issued from there his famous slogan “Delhi Chalo”.  
  
Led INA (Azad Hind Fauj | 1942) from 1943.  
o INAwas first formed under Mohan Singh and Japanese Major Iwaichi Fujiwara.  
  
o Provisional Government of Free \*India: Established in Imphal (Manipur) to mobilize Indians for an Anti — British  
Revolt.  
  
Famous Slogan: Tum Mujhe Khoon Do Mai Tumhe Azadi Doonga' (Give Me Blood, I Shall Give You Freedom)  
Newspaper: Swaraj  
  
Died ina Plane Crash in Taiwan in Aug 1945.  
  
Bhadrakali Inscription  
  
Bhadrakali Inscription (1169 CE) highlights Somnath Temple's Historical Continuity, Patronage, and Architectural Evolution  
  
under Solanki (Chaulukya) Dynasty.  
  
Location: Prabhas Patan, Gujarat (Embedded in Wall of Ancient Bhadrakali Temple).  
  
Glorifies Acharya Bhavabrihaspati (Spiritual Preceptor of Solanki King Kumarapala).  
  
o Reflects Close Link between Royal Authority and Religious Institutions in Medieval Western India.  
Inscription traces Mythic History of Somnath Temple across 4 Yugas:  
  
o Satya Yuga: Temple built in Gold  
  
o Treta Yuga: Temple built in Silver  
  
o \_Dvapara Yuga: Temple built in Wood  
  
o. Kali Yuga: Temple rebuilt in Stone (Attributed to Bhimdev Solanki).  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 89  
  
\=== PAGE 92 ===  
{ January 2026  
  
é, TOPIC  
: “inNEWS  
  
A eat  
  
INTERNATIONAL NEWS  
  
India Becomes World's Largest Rice Producer  
  
India surpasses China to become World's Largest Rice Producer (\~150 Million Tonnes); Union Agriculture Minister Announces  
Record-Breaking Output.  
  
India's Rice Crop: Semi— Aquatic Paddy thrives with 100—150 cm Rainfall, 20—30°C, Standing Water; Grown in Winter (Aman),  
Autumn (Aus), Summer (Boro).  
  
e Global Production: India \> China \> Indonesia \> Bangladesh \> Japan  
¢ State—wise Rice Production in India (2024-25): Uttar Pradesh (13.8%) \> Telangana \> West Bengal \> Punjab \> Chhattisgarh  
  
e India is World's Largest Rice Exporter.  
  
Indus Waters Treaty  
  
India accelerates Sawalkot, Ratle and Dulhasti Hydropower Projects amid Renewed Indus Waters Treaty Tensions.  
  
Sawalkot Hydropower Project on Chenab River (J\&K): 1856 MW Run-of-River Project boosts Renewable Energy Capacity.  
e Signed: 1960 (India— Pakistan, Brokered by World Bank)  
e Western Rivers: Indus, Jhelum, Chenab — Primarily for Pakistan, with Limited Use Allowed to India.  
  
e Eastern Rivers: Ravi, Beas, Sutlej — Full Rights to India.  
  
POLITY & GOVERNANCE  
  
PM SVANidhi Scheme  
PMILaunches PM SVANidhi Credit Card to Enhance Formal Credit Access for Street Vendors and Promote Financial Inclusion.  
  
e PMSVANidhi stands for Prime Minister Street Vendor's Atma Nirbhar Nidhi.  
e Launched: 2020  
e Type: Central Sector Scheme  
  
e Objective: To facilitate Affordable Working Capital Loans for Street Vendors to resume livelihoods disrupted due to COVID  
— 19 Lockdowns.  
  
e Implementing Ministries: Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Department of Financial Services  
  
ECINET  
  
ECINET launched at International Conference on Democracy and Election Management (2026), After Successful Beta Pilot  
during 2025 Bihar Assembly Elections.  
  
e ECINET stands for Election Commission of India Network.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 90  
  
\=== PAGE 93 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Designed as the World's Largest Electoral Service Platform.  
Unifies Multiple Electoral Services ona Single Platform.  
  
Key Services: Voter Registration, Electoral Roll Search, Track Your Application, Know Your Candidate, Connect with  
Election Officials, e—EPIC Download, Grievance Redressal.  
  
Purpose: Integrated Digital Ecosystem for End—to—End Management of Electoral Processes.  
  
| Battery Pack Aadhaar Number  
  
India releases Draft Guidelines for Battery Pack Aadhaar System to Enhance Traceability, Recycling, and Circular Economy  
  
Practices.  
  
Indigenous Digital Identification and Data Storage System for Batteries  
  
o Assigned to Each Battery Pack & Functions as a Permanent Digital Identity  
Core Purpose: Ensure End-to-End Traceability of Battery Packs across their Entire Lifecycle  
  
Battery Categories Covered: Electric Vehicle Batteries & Industrial Batteries with Capacity Greater than 2 kWh  
  
4" Industrial Revolution  
  
World Economic Forum announced 5 new Centres for 4" Industrial Revolution (C4IR) worldwide.  
  
India gains one new centre in Andhra Pradesh, making it 3" C4IR in India, after Mumbai (Maharashtra) and Telangana.  
  
Coined By: Klaus Schwab (Founder, WEF) in 2016  
Current Phase of Transformation marked by Convergence of Digital, Physical and Biological Technologies.  
  
Key Technologies: Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, Internet of Things, Quantum Computing, Big Data, Blockchain,  
Biotechnology  
  
ECONOMY  
  
Payments Regulatory Board  
  
RBI Governor chairs First Payments Regulatory Board Meeting, Formalising India's New Institutional Framework for Payment  
  
Systems.  
  
Type: Payment and Settlement Systems Act 2007  
Replaced Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems.  
Primary Role: Regulation and Supervision of All Payment Systems in India.  
  
Objective: Ensure Safety, Efficiency, Stability and Integrity of Payments Ecosystem & Strengthen Consumer Protection and  
Systemic Resilience in Digital Payments  
  
Scope of Regulation: Electronic and Non — Electronic Payment Systems & Domestic as well as Cross — Border Payment  
Mechanisms  
  
Constituted By: Reserve Bank of India  
  
Composition: Chairperson (RBI Governor), 2 Representatives from RBI & 3 Nominees of Central Government  
  
e — Business Visa  
  
India Introduces New e — Production Investment Business Visa for Chinese Businessmen to Boost Manufacturing and Supply  
Chains.  
  
Target Group: Chinese Businessmen  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 91  
  
\=== PAGE 94 ===  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Visa Type: e— Production Investment Business Visa (e—B-—4)  
Nature: Activity — specific, Business — linked Visa (Not General Employment)  
  
Permitted Business Activities: Installation and Commissioning of Equipment, Quality Checks and Essential Maintenance,  
Supply — Chain Development including Empanelling of Vendors.  
  
Processing Time: \~45—50 Days  
  
Duration of Stay: Up to 6 Months in India  
  
DEFENCE  
  
India — Pakistan Non — Attack Agreement on Nuclear Installations  
  
India and Pakistan Exchange Annual Nuclear Facility Lists under Agreement Prohibiting Attacks on Nuclear Installations.  
  
Signed: 31 December 1988  
o Entered into Force: 27 January 1991  
Core Provision: Both Countries are required to Exchange Details of their Nuclear Installations every year on | January.  
  
Objective: To Prevent Intentional or Accidental Damage to Nuclear Facilities & To Reduce Risk of Escalation in a  
Nuclearised South Asian Region.  
  
Scope of Agreement: Prohibits Direct or Indirect Attacks on Nuclear Installations & Nuclear Facilities  
  
o Applies during Peace as well as Conflict Situations.  
  
Pinaka Long Range Guided Rocket  
  
Pinaka Long Range Guided Rocket (LRGR-— 120) successfully Flight— Tested at Chandipur's Integrated Test Range, Odisha.  
  
ALong- Range Artillery Weapon System developed for Indian Army.  
Range: Approx 120km  
  
Design & Development: Armament Research and Development Establishment in collaboration with High Energy Materials  
Research Laboratory, with support from Defence Research and Development Laboratory and Research Centre Imarat.  
  
Operation Pawan  
  
10" Armed Forces Veterans Day: Defence Minister honors Courage and Sacrifices of Indian Peacekeeping Force in Sri Lanka.  
  
Launched following Indo — Sri Lanka Accord signed on 29 July 1987.  
Objective: To enforce Peace and Disarm Militant Groups in Sri Lanka, primarily LTTE (Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam).  
  
IPKF was withdrawn in March 1990 after a shift in Sri Lankan Government's Policy and changing Political Scenario.  
  
S\&T AND SPACE  
  
Voyager 1  
  
Voyager | set to become 1“ Human—Made Object to Reach One Light — Day Distance from Earth.  
  
Launched by NASA in 1977.  
Mission Objective: Flybys of Jupiter and Saturn to study their Atmosphere, Rings and Moons.  
  
Major Achievements: 1“ to cross Heliosphere— Boundary where Sun's Influence Ends and Interstellar Space Begins.  
  
o 1\*Human-made Object in Interstellar Space: Traveling Beyond Solar System into space between Stars.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 92  
  
\=== PAGE 95 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs January 2026\_AILETComer  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
OSIRIS — REx Mission  
  
NASA's OSIRIS — REx Samples from Asteroid Bennu contain Sugars, Amino Acids and All DNA/RNA Nucleobases, Hinting at  
Extraterrestrial Life Potential.  
  
e OSIRIS—REx stands for Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification and Security — Regolith Explorer.  
e 1" United States Mission to successfully Collect and Return Samples from an Asteroid (Bennu).  
  
e After completing its Primary Objective, spacecraft was renamed OSIRIS —APEX & redirected to study Asteroid Apophis.  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change notified Kumbhalgarh Wildlife Sanctuary as Eco — Sensitive Zone under  
Environment Protection Act, 1986.  
  
Kumbhalgarh Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan—Established in 1971, surrounding UNESCO — listed Kumbhalgarh Fort.  
e Legal Basis: Environment (Protection) Act 1986  
  
e Actasa Transition Zone between Areas of High Protection (PAs) and Regions of Lesser Protection.  
  
e Objective: Regulate Activities to Reduce Anthropogenic Pressure and Promote Sustainable Development.  
  
e¢ Generally up to 10 km around Protected Areas, but Site — specific Variations are Permitted.  
  
SUMMITS, REPO  
  
TS & INDICES  
  
Responsible Nations Index  
  
India launched Responsible Nations Index to Promote Ethical Governance, Sustainability, and Global Responsibility Beyond  
Economic Power.  
  
Responsible Nations Index 2026: Singapore Tops, followed by Switzerland and Denmark; India ranks 6".  
  
e AGlobal Index assessing 154 Countries.  
  
e Evaluates how Responsibly Nations function Internally and Globally, beyond GDP Metrics  
  
e Assessment Parameters: Ethical Governance, Social Well-being, Environmental Stewardship, Global Responsibility  
e¢ Developed By: World Intellectual Foundation  
  
co Incollaboration with Jawaharlal Nehru University and IM Mumbai  
  
e Methodology: 58 Indicators  
  
ORGANISATIONS & CONVENTIONS  
  
OPEC+ OPEC+ (Vienna Group)  
OPEC+ Agrees to Maintain Steady Oil Output amid Rising \~ | ¢ — Createdin 2016. ;  
Gopolitical Tensions and Global Energy Uncertainties. i ¢ Coalition of OPEC and 10 Non— OPEC Countries i  
  
that Export Crude Oil in response to Falling Oil i  
  
i Prices caused by Rising US Shale Output. i  
. Non — OPEC Countries: Azerbaijan, Bahrain,  
e Type: Permanent Inter— Governmental Organization i Brunei, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mexico, Oman,  
  
e OPEC stands for Organization of Petroleum Exporting  
Countries.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 93  
  
\=== PAGE 96 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_AILETCorner\_  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Founded: 1960 (Baghdad Conference) by Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Venezuela.  
Members: 12 Oil— Exporting Developing Nations (India is Nota Member).  
  
Objective: To Coordinate and Unify Petroleum Policies among Member Countries & Ensure Fair and Stable Prices for  
Petroleum Producers.  
  
HQ: Vienna (Austria)  
  
International Renewable Energy Agency  
  
16" IRENA Assembly concludes in Abu Dhabi (UAE).  
  
Nature: Inter— Governmental Organization  
Established in 2009  
  
o Entered into force: 2010  
  
Objective: Support Countries in transitioning to Renewable Energy for Sustainable Development, Universal Energy Access,  
Climate Action.  
  
Official Custodian for tracking progress on “UAE Consensus” Targets adopted at COP28.  
Major Reports: World Energy Transitions Outlook, Renewable Energy and Jobs— Annual Review (with ILO)  
HQ: Abu Dhabi (UAE)  
  
Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters  
  
UN Secretary-General appointed Indian Diplomat as Chair of Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters for 2026 —27.  
  
Constituted in 1978 by United Nations.  
  
Acts as Board of Trustees of United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, guiding its Research Priorities and  
Governance.  
  
Advises UN Secretary — General on issues related to Arms Limitation, Disarmament, International Security  
Members: 15 Members  
  
Secretariat: New York  
  
Directorate General of Mines Safety |  
  
DGMS marks 125" Foundation Day.  
  
Established: 1902  
o Initially constituted as “Bureau of Mines Inspection” during Colonial Period.  
Renamed as Directorate General of Mines Safety in 1967.  
  
Responsible for Regulating Occupational Safety, Health and Welfare of Workers employed in Coal Mines, Metalliferous  
Mines, Oil Mines.  
  
Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Labour and Employment  
Head: Director General of Mines Safety  
HQ: Dhanbad, Jharkhand  
  
\[Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative  
  
Spain joined Indo — Pacific Oceans Initiative, Strengthening Europe's Engagement ina Free and Rules — based Indo — Pacific.  
  
Nature: Non-—Treaty, Voluntary, Issue— based Cooperation Framework  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 94  
  
\=== PAGE 97 ===  
LAW PREP  
Current Affairs January 2026\_AILETComer  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
e Launched By: India at East Asia Summit (2019, Bangkok)  
e Builds on India's SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the Region) Vision.  
  
AWARDS  
  
Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development  
  
Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development 2025 awarded to Graca Machel, renowned Human Rights Activist  
from Mozambique.  
  
e = Instituted: 1985  
e Frequency: Annually  
e — Eligibility: Open to Any Individual or Organization, irrespective of Nationality, Race or Religion  
  
e Administered By: Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust  
  
PLACES IN NEWS  
rm Uses +  
Somnath Temple y a one  
  
? Map of 12 Jyotirlinga in India  
  
PM pays Tribute to Somnath Temple, Commemorating 1000 Years Since  
First Recorded Attack in 1026 AD.  
  
e Location: Prabhas Patan (Saurashtra, Gujarat).  
e —1\*among 12 Sacred Jyotirlings of Lord Shiva.  
  
e King Bhimdev I of Solanki Dynasty rebuilt Somnath Temple in Stone  
after Mahmud of Ghazni's 1026 CE Destruction (documented by Persian  
scholar Al—Biruni).  
  
co. Tradition says Temple was built in Phases: Gold by Moon God,  
  
Silver by Ravana, Later Wooden Structure by Lord Krishna.  
  
e Somnath Temple reconstruction was initiated by Vallabhbhai Patel in x —  
1947 in Maru — Gurjara Style (Chaulukya or Solanki Style), Completed ’ ee  
in May 1951. ig  
PERSON IN NEWS  
Savitribai Phule  
  
PM pays Tribute to Savitribai Phule on Birth Anniversary, Honouring Her Legacy in Women's Education and Social Reform  
e Born: 1831 (Satara, Maharashtra)  
  
e Role: Social Reformer, Educationist, Poet, Women's Rights Pioneer  
  
e 1"Headmistress of India's 1“ School for Girls in Pune (established with Jyotirao Phule in 1848).  
  
e Died in 1897 due to Bubonic Plague.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 95  
  
\=== PAGE 98 ===  
Current Affairs January 2026\_AILETCorner\_  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Key Contributions  
  
Mahila Seva Mandal: Worked for Women's Rights, Dignity and Social Awareness.  
  
Balhatya Pratibandhak Griha: Shelter for Pregnant Women facing Social Ostracism, helping Prevent Female  
Infanticide. i  
  
Satyashodhak Marriages (1873): Promoted Simple, Dowry — Free Marriages based on Equality.  
  
Kavya Phule: Collection of Poems advocating Social Justice, Women's Empowerment and Equality.  
  
Bavan Kashi Subodh Ratnakar: Literary Work reflecting Moral Reform and Rational Thought.  
  
Madhav Gadgil  
  
Renowned Ecologist Madhav Gadgil Passes Away, India Loses Influential Voice in Conservation and Sustainable Development.  
  
Birth: 1942 (Pune, Maharashtra)  
  
Field: Ecology, Environmental Science, Biodiversity Conservation  
  
Regarded as a Pioneer of Ecological Thinking in India  
  
Key Contributions  
  
o Founder, Centre for Ecological Sciences (IISc Bengaluru): Helped establish Ecology as a Strong Interdisciplinary  
Academic Field in India.  
  
o Instrumental in Creation of Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (1986) — India's 1“ Biosphere Reserve).  
  
o Recommended Declaration of Entire Western Ghats as an Ecologically Sensitive Area.  
  
Awards and Recognitions: Padma Shri, Padma Bhushan, Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement, Volvo Environment  
Prize, UNEP— Champions of the Earth Award  
  
Shaheed Udham Singh  
  
India observes 126" Birth Anniversary of Shaheed Udham Singh on 26 Dec 2025.  
  
Born: 1899 (Sangrur, Punjab)  
  
Revered as Shaheed —1—Azam Sardar Udham Singh  
  
Key Contributions: Assassinated Michael O'Dwyer (Former Lieutenant Governor of Punjab) in London (13 Mar 1940).  
o O'Dwyer was responsible for endorsing repression that culminated in Jallianwala Bagh Massacre (1919).  
  
Symbolic Identity: Used the name “Ram Mohammad Singh Azad”, reflecting Composite Nationalism, Secular Unity,  
Resistance to Colonial Divide—and— Rule Policies  
  
Revolutionary Associations: Ghadar Party & Hindustan Socialist Republican Association  
  
Died: 1940 (Executed by British Government)  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 96  
  
\=== PAGE 99 ===  
AILET 2026  
ARYAN  
  
LPT ID: 0079546  
ONLINE PROGRAM  
  
CLAT 2026  
GEETALI  
  
LPT ID: 0060489  
ONLINE GC BATCH  
  
2 YEARS TO  
  
PERFECT  
YOUR RANK  
  
EARLY  
\=  
STARTERS  
  
SECURE YOUR  
CLAT 2027/28 SEAT  
sea TODAY Seen  
  
\=== PAGE 100 ===  
CLAT 2026  
  
AIR 3 CLAT 2026  
  
ROHAN ae AIRS  
} ARGH  
JOSHI } ee JAIN CLAT 2026  
AIRY  
  
MANVI  
MP YADAV  
  
CLAT 2026 |  
AIR1  
  
GEETALI  
GUPTA  
  
\-”  
100% sEHOLARSHIP  
  
CLAT 2027/2028 | 23:22  
  
LAW PREP  
SCHOLARSHIP  
ADMISSION  
TEST  
  
SCAN QR  
TO REGISTER  
  
TIME- 10:00-6:00 PM  
  
OFFLINE LPT CENTER .  
This Sunday  
  
& ONLINE  
  
JAIPUR : S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar ane a) © ‘())  
  
(M) 7240060099 8"  
ESE Ge) Gael Gy  
JODHPUR : EC-22A, First Floor, Opp. Steel Bhawan, F :  
Shastri Circle, (M) 76659 44999 & Es Bie  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Jodhpur Jaipur \* North Delhi \* South Delhi \* Gurgaon \* Noida \* Patna ¢ Ahmedabad ¢ Chandigarh \* Karnale Mumbai ¢ Pune ¢ Faridabad  
Lucknow ¢ Kanpur ¢ Agra ° Varanasi \* Prayagraj \* Dehradun Bhopal « Indore © Gwalior « Jabalpur ¢ Raipur © Bhilai ¢ Ranchi ¢ Jamshedpur  
¢ Bangalore \* Kolkata \* Muzaffarpur \* Ghaziabad \* Nagpur \* Jammu ¢ Bathinda \* Rewari \* Mysore \* Ernakulam \* Chennai \* Hyderabad  
  