=== PAGE 12 ===
  
/\_", January 2026  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
STRATEGIC  
IMPORTANCE  
  
OF GREENLAND  
  
Why in News?  
  
Denmark PM (Mette Frederiksen) rejects US Claims on Greenland, Reaffirms Danish Sovereignty over Autonomous  
  
Arctic Territory.  
  
When did Greenland become part of Denmark?  
  
e Greenland (World's Largest Island | PM: Jens — Frederik Nielsen)  
became a Danish Colony in Early 18" Century, after an expedition led by  
Danish — Norwegian Missionary Hans Egede arrived in 1721.  
  
o 1In1979, it becamea Self— Governing Territory.  
o Since 2009, Greenland has Right to declare Independence through a  
Referendum.  
  
e Arctic Island is one of Denmark's Two Autonomous Territories, Other  
One being Faroe Islands.  
  
o Region hosts Kaffeklubben Island, Recognised as World's  
  
Northernmost Point of Land.  
  
e Since Denmark is a part of NATO, Greenland is By Default a part of  
  
Washington, DC Allantic Ocean  
  
North Atlantic Military Alliance. United States  
  
e Greenland is Not a Member State of European Union, but is associated  
with it as one of 25 EU Overseas Countries and Territories. Hence,  
  
Greenlanders are considered to be EU Citizens.  
o In 1973, Greenland joined now — defunct European Community with Denmark, but left in 1985. EU has replaced  
  
European Community.  
  
Historical Overview of US — Greenland Relations  
  
U.S. seized Temporary Control of Greenland in WWII to Prevent Nazi Germany from Exploiting Danish Colony  
after Denmark's Occupation. i  
  
In 1946, U.S. proposed a $100 Million offer to Denmark for Outright Purchase of Greenland.  
1951 US— Denmark Defence Agreement formalized American Military Access to Greenland.  
  
Today, U.S. maintains Pituffik Space Base (formerly known as Thule Air Base), a pivotal facility for monitoring  
potential missile threats from nations including Russia, China, and North Korea.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 10  
  
\
=== PAGE 13 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
Why Greenland Matters Strategically?  
  
e = Military and Security Significance  
o Geostrategic Location: Greenland lies between North peer rrrrrrerssessssssssseeceecereeesasssseeececeeneesaay  
America and Europe, making it a Linchpin in Arctic and Trans Extra Shots  
  
—Atlantic Security Architecture. i © Louisiana Purchase (1803): U.S. acquired  
: Louisiana from France for $15 million. H  
  
ie Alaska Purchase (1867): U.S. obtained i  
i Alaska from Russia for $7.2 million.  
e Danish West Indies (1917): U.S. purchased  
i these islands from Denmark, which are  
  
\= Greenland lies within strategic GIUK (Greenland,  
Iceland, United Kingdom) Gap, Key Chokepoint for  
  
Monitoring Naval Movements in North Atlantic  
o. Missile Defence & Early Warning: Hosts Critical  
  
Infrastructure for U.S. Ballistic Missile Early — Warning  
  
System, enabling Detection of Missile Launches over  
Arctic.  
  
o Space & Intelligence Assets: Ideal Location for Ground Stations tracking Polar — Orbiting Satellites, which are  
essential for Military Intelligence and Surveillance, GPS and Navigation, Weather and Climate Monitoring  
  
o NATO Relevance: Enhances NATO's Ability to monitor Russian Activities in Arctic and North Atlantic.  
  
¢ Critical Minerals and Natural Resources  
o Rare Earth Elements: Greenland possesses Large Untapped Reserves of rare earth minerals, crucial for  
Semiconductors, Renewable Energy Technologies, Defence Systems  
o Strategic Diversification: Offers the West an Alternative supply Chain to China — dominated REE Markets, aligning  
with Broader Geo — Economic Decoupling Efforts.  
e Emerging Arctic Shipping Routes  
o Impact of Climate Change: Melting Arctic Ice is opening New Maritime Corridors, especially Transpolar Sea Route.  
o Global Trade Implications: These routes could Reduce Travel Time between Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, Lower  
Fuel and Shipping Costs, Bypass Strategic Chokepoints like Panama Canal and Suez Canal.  
o Economic and Strategic Leverage: Control and Influence over Arctic Sea Lanes will shape Future Global Trade and  
Naval Power Projection.  
e Great Power Competition in Arctic  
o US-China — Russia Dynamics: China labels itself a “Near — Arctic State” and is investing in Arctic Research and  
Infrastructure & Russia has heavily militarised Arctic Coastline.  
v The U.S. views Greenland as Central to countering Both.  
o Sovereignty Sensitivities: Denmark's Firm Stance highlights Tensions between Territorial Sovereignty and Strategic  
  
Ambitions of Major Powers.  
  
EU's 'Bazooka' or Anti — Coercion Instrument  
  
| French President urges European Union to invoke Anti — Coercion Instrument 'Trade Bazooka', for the first time,  
igainst US Tariffs amid Greenland Dispute. i  
  
Primarily a Deterrent Tool, with capacity for Proportionate Retaliation if Coercion Persists.  
  
EU Legal Mechanism designed to respond when a Non — EU Country seeks to Pressure or Coerce EU or its  
  
Member States by Applying or Threatening Measures that affect Trade or Investment.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ ll  
  
\
=== PAGE 14 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News aa  
  
Objective:  
  
oO  
  
oO  
  
oO  
  
Deter Economic Coercion  
Protect EU's Strategic Autonomy and Policy Space  
  
Ensure Disputes are resolved through Dialogue First, with escalation only if necessary.  
  
Possible Countermeasures under ACI  
  
oO  
  
oO  
oO  
oO  
  
Trade Measures: Import/Export Restrictions on Goods and Services  
  
Investment Measures: Restrictions on Foreign Direct Investment  
  
Market Access: Limiting Access to EU Internal Market  
  
IP & Services: Measures Affecting Intellectual Property Rights, Public Procurement and Services  
  
NATO: Members since 1949 2004  
  
NATO was created by 12 countries from Europe \> \_—— Estonia \~ Bulgaria  
  
and North America on 4 April 1949. os  
  
Since then, 20 more  
  
countries have.  
  
joined NATO“  
  
through 10 roundg\! -  
  
of enlargement. 4 slovenia  
ea  
  
Any decision to invite a  
country to join the Alliance Is - 2009  
  
taken by the North Atlantic oo  
Council, NATO's principal CO Albania @@W Croatia  
  
political decision-making  
body, on the basis of North  
consensus among all Allies. Amorics 2017  
  
}) Montenegro  
  
1949 j  
12 Founding Members 1952.  
  
Pescium) EH uuxembourg (BB Greece  
  
ts) Canada @m Netherlands  
e Denmark rt Norway  
  
Perce @ rorwest  
  
rt Iceland GTR united Kingdom  
  
Qiey \>) Borited sates  
  
NATO's essential purpose is to @ | AlLNATO  
safeguard the freedom and security of = decisions are  
  
all its members through POLITICAL Ft made by  
  
& MILITARY means, to ensure and consensus, after discussion  
secure a lasting peace in Europe and and consultation among  
North America member countries.  
  
military power to undertake crisis-  
  
management operations i)  
7 Brussels, Belgium  
  
Article 5  
  
“Article 5 provides that if a NATO Ally is the victim of an \*  
armed attack, each and every other member of the Alliance  
  
will consider this act of violence as an armed attack against  
  
all members and will take the actions it deems necessary to  
  
assist the Ally attacked."  
  
Q If diplomatic efforts fail, NATO has the  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 12  
  
\
=== PAGE 15 ===
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Who is the current Prime Minister of Denmark who rejected US claims on Greenland?  
(a) Lars Lokke Rasmussen (b) Mette Frederiksen  
(c) Helle Thorning-Schmidt (d) Anders Fogh Rasmussen  
  
When did Greenland become a Danish colony?  
(a) Early 17th Century (b) Early 18th Century —(c) Early 19th Century (d) Early 20th Century  
  
Who led the expedition that arrived in Greenland in 1721?  
(a) Vitus Bering (b) Erik the Red (c) Hans Egede (d) Roald Amundsen  
  
When did Greenland become a self-governing territory?  
(a) 1973 (b) 1979 (c) 1985 (d) 2009  
  
Since which year has Greenland had the right to declare independence through a referendum?  
(a) 1979 (b) 1985 (c) 2000 (d) 2009  
  
What is Denmark's other autonomous territory besides Greenland?  
(a) Iceland (b) Faroe Islands (c) Jan Mayen (d) Svalbard  
  
What is the name of the island in Greenland recognized as the world's northernmost point of land?  
(a) Ellesmere Island (b) Alert Island (c) Kaffeklubben Island (d) Nord Island  
  
Is Greenland a member of the European Union?  
(a) Yes, full member (b) No, but associated as EU Overseas Country and Territory  
(c) Yes, but with special status (d) No, and not associated  
  
When did Greenland join the European Community with Denmark?  
(a) 1968 (b) 1973 (c) 1979 (d) 1985  
  
When did Greenland leave the European Community?  
(a) 1979 (b) 1982 (c) 1985 (d) 1990  
  
What does GIUK stand for in strategic terms?  
(a) Greenland, Ireland, United Kingdom (b) Greenland, Iceland, United Kingdom  
(c) Greenland, Iceland, Ukraine (d) Germany, Iceland, United Kingdom  
  
What strategic function does the GIUK Gap serve?  
(a) Trade route monitoring (b) Weather observation  
(c) Naval movement monitoring in North Atlantic (d) Oil exploration  
  
Greenland hosts critical infrastructure for which US system?  
(a) Cyber security system (b) Ballistic Missile Early-Warning System  
(c) Weather prediction system (d) Communication relay system  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 13  
  
\
=== PAGE 16 ===
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
4\. | Why is Greenland ideal for ground stations tracking satellites?  
  
5\. | What type of minerals does Greenland possess in large untapped reserves?  
(a) Precious metals (b) Fossil fuels (c) Rare Earth Elements  
  
6\. Which country currently dominates the Rare Earth Elements (REE) market?  
(a) United States (b) Russia (c) China  
  
7\. What is causing new Arctic shipping routes to open?  
(c) International agreements (d) Deep-sea drilling  
8\. | What is the name of the emerging Arctic shipping route mentioned?  
  
(a) Northwest Passage (b) Northern Sea Route  
(c) Transpolar Sea Route (d) Arctic Circle Route  
  
9\. Which strategic chokepoints could new Arctic routes bypass?  
  
(a) Strait of Hormuz and Bab-el-Mandeb (b) Panama Canal and Suez Canal  
(c) Strait of Gibraltar and Bosphorus (d) Strait of Malacca and Sunda Strait  
  
20\. How does China label itself in relation to the Arctic?  
(a) Arctic Observer State (b) Near-Arctic State  
(c) Arctic Partner Nation (d) Polar Research State  
  
W: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
  
(a) Low population density (b) Clear skies year-round  
(c) Location for tracking polar-orbiting satellites (d) Minimal electromagnetic interference  
  
(a) Advanced icebreaker technology (b) Climate change and melting Arctic ice  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
e Hungary's Farmers and Volunteers launch 'Water Guardians' Initiative to Restore Local Water and Combat  
  
Desertification in Homokhatsag Region.  
  
o Water Guardians' Initiative in Hungary Aims to Retain Local Water, Boost Soil Moisture, Agriculture, and  
  
Vegetation.  
  
e Amazon's Stingless Bees (Meliponini) granted Legal Rights, Becoming 1" Insect Species to Receive Nature — based  
  
Protections.  
  
e American Biologist Toby Kiers won Tyler Prize (Nobel for the Environment) for Pioneering Research on Mycorrhizal  
  
Networks and Environmental Sustainability.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
14  
  
\
