=== PAGE 65 ===
  
i January 2026  
(32, TOPIC  
. \~“inNEWS  
  
UN HIGH SEAS  
TREATY  
  
ENTERS INTO FORCE  
  
The UN High Seas Treaty  
  
Why in News?  
UN High Seas Treaty (BBNJ) enters into force, establishing 1st Global Legal Framework to Protect Ocean Biodiversity  
Beyond National Jurisdiction.  
  
Outer Space UNCLOS Maritime Zones  
  
National Airspace International Airspace  
  
NM = Nautical Mile = 1.852 km  
  
24NM  
  
Contiguous Zone  
  
Territorial Sea  
State has full sovereignty  
  
(Pursuit Zone) High Seas  
State can act against  
  
those who break the law  
  
Exclusive Economic Zone  
State has the right to exploit all economic resources  
  
200 NM (320 km)  
  
Individual countries  
can claim control  
  
Free for navigation by  
vessels of all nations  
  
UN High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement)  
  
e Adopted: 2023  
  
e A Legally Binding International Treaty governing Ocean Spaces beyond National Jurisdiction, including High Seas and  
International Seabed Area.  
o These areas are considered Global Commons, Open to All States for activities such as Navigation, Overflight and Laying  
of Submarine Cables and Pipelines.  
o Collectively, they account for over 2.3" of World's Ocean Surface, making Governance and Conservation Critically  
Important.  
e Negotiated under United Nations — led Inter— Governmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond National  
Jurisdiction.  
¢ Becomes 3“ implementing agreement under UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), alongside 1994 Agreement  
on Part XI (Deep Seabed Mining) and 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 63  
  
\
=== PAGE 66 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
e Core Objective: Safeguard Biodiversity in High Seas (Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction), contributing to Kunming —  
Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (30% Protection of Land & Sea by 2030).  
  
e 64 Pillars of the BBNJ Agreement: Marine Genetic Resources, Area — Based Management Tools, Environmental Impact  
Assessments, Capacity Building and Technology Transfer  
  
e Establishes Conference of the Parties (COP) as Decision — Making Body.  
  
e Ratified By: 83 Countries (India has signed the agreement, Ratification Pending)  
  
UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION  
ON THE LAW OF THE SEA  
(UNCLOS)  
  
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea  
(UNCLOS), also called Constitution for the oceans, has 168  
parties, and sets out the legal framework within which all  
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out.  
  
The Convention has created three new institutions  
on the International level  
  
THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL \]  
FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA  
  
An independent judicial body. It has jurisdiction over any dispute  
  
concerning the interpretation or application of the Convention,  
and over all matters specifically provided for in any other  
agreement which confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal  
  
O 2 THE INTERNATIONAL  
SEABED AUTHORITY  
ISA has the mandate to ensure the effective protection  
  
of the marine environment from harmful effects that  
may arise from deep-seabed related activities  
  
THE COMMISSION ON THE LIMITS  
  
OF THE CONTINENTAL SHELF  
To facilitate the implementation of the UNCLOS in respect of the  
establishment of the outer limits of the continental shelf beyond  
  
200 nautical miles (M) from the baselines from which the breadth  
of the territorial sea is measured  
  
Fisheries Sector in India  
i e¢ = Total Fish Output (2024-25): 197.75 Lakh Tonnes  
  
e Fisheries contribute 7.43% to Agriculture Gross Value Added (Highest Contribution among Agriculture &  
: Allied Sectors). i  
  
Le 2" Largest Producer (8% of World Production) | 2" Largest Aquaculture Producer | 4" Largest Exporter.  
  
|e Lin Shrimp Production | 3" in Capture Fisheries Production  
  
e¢ = United States is Largest Importer of Indian Seafood.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 64  
  
\
=== PAGE 67 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (2020)  
  
e Introduced as part of "Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package" with an  
  
investment of Rs 20,050 Crores. National Fisheries Development Board  
ie Established: 2006  
  
e Aim: To bring Blue Revolution through Sustainable and: H  
: ¢ Aims: To enhance Fish Production and ;  
  
Responsible Development of Fisheries Sector in India & and  
  
Doubling Farmers’ Income. Productivity in India & to coordinate Fishery i  
  
Development in an integrated and holistic i  
  
e Focuses on Modernizing Fisheries Infrastructure, Promoting manner.  
  
Sustainable Aquaculture Practices, Improving Post — Harvest i © — Works under Ministry of Fisheries, Animal i  
  
Management, enhancing Livelihoods of Fishers & Fish Farmers. Husbandry and Dairying  
  
HQ: Hyderabad (Telangana)  
  
e Nodal Agency: National Fisheries Development Board  
  
e Ministry: Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying (Rajiv  
Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh).  
  
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah — Yojana  
  
Sub — Scheme under “Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana” for “Micro and Small Enterprises’ ‘operating  
in Fisheries Sector.  
  
Objective: Formalization of Fisheries Sector under a National Fisheries Digital Platform & supporting  
  
Fisheries Micro and Small Enterprises.  
  
Investment: %6,000 Crore  
  
o “50%” Public Finance including "World Bank" and "Agence Frangaise de Développement" (AFD)  
External Financing & “Rest 50%" Investment from “Private Sector” leverage.  
  
Implementation Period: 4 Year (From 2023 — 24 to 2026-27).  
  
Government Initiatives for Growth of Fisheries Sector  
  
e Blue Revolution 2015: Promote Sustainable Development amd foc rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrerrcrnereennnnennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnneneng  
Management of Fisheries Sector. Extra Shots  
  
ie Fisheries: State Subject  
  
e¢ = National Fish Farmers Day: July 10  
  
e = World Fisheries Day: Nov 21 i  
  
Strengthening Fisheries Governance. : @ India's I" Dugong (Sea Cow) Conservation  
  
e Sagarmala Programme 2015: To promote Port — led Reserve: Palk Bay (Tamil Nadu)  
: o Sea Cow: Only Known Marine  
  
o. Focus: Increasing Fish Production and Productivity through  
  
Adoption of Modern Technologies, Enhancing  
  
Infrastructure Facilities, Promoting Entrepreneurship and  
  
Development and unlock potential of India's Maritime Sector.  
  
Herbivorous Mammal  
  
e National Fisheries Policy 2020: Provide a Comprehensive  
  
Framework for Sustainable Development of Fisheries Sector.  
e — 1"Ever Riverine Dolphin Estimation: To assess Population and Conservation Needs of River Dolphins in India.  
o Estimated a total of 6,327 Dolphins across 28 Rivers in 8 States.  
  
o Revealed Uttar Pradesh as having Highest Population, followed by Bihar, West Bengal, Assam.  
  
e Fisheries Infrastructure Development Fund: Envisages Creation of Fisheries Infrastructure Facilities both in Marine and  
Inland Fisheries Sectors.  
  
o Nodal Loaning Entities: NABARD, National Cooperatives Development Corporation, All Scheduled Banks.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 65  
  
\
=== PAGE 68 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
e Matsya Setu App: Launched by NFDB and ICAR — Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture (Bhubaneswar) to Offer  
Online Training Modules for Fish Farmers and Stakeholders.  
  
e Integrated Aqua Parks: 5 Parks in Assam, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, Nagaland.  
  
e Development of 100 Climate Resilient Coastal Fishermen Villages.  
  
WTO Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies  
Adopted at 12" Ministerial Conference 2022  
o Enters into Force, after Two-Thirds Member approval, in Sep 2025.  
  
Objective: Establish Binding Rules to Curb Harmful Fisheries Subsidies.  
o Supports SDG 14— Conserve and Sustainably Use Oceans, Seas and Marine Resources.  
  
¢ Subsidies Prohibited: Those linked to Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing.  
o Subsidies for Fishing on Overfished Stocks.  
o Support for Fishing in Unregulated High Seas.  
  
Members must submit Fisheries — related Data.  
  
o India's Position: Did Not Join, citing Need to protect Small Fishers, Livelihoods and Food Security.  
WTO Fish Fund: Provides Aid to Developing and LDC Members for implementation.  
Special & Differential Treatment: Flexibility for Developing Countries, though Within Common Rules.  
  
About Peace Clause  
  
Gangetic Dolphin  
  
Scientific Name: Platanista Gangetica  
Type: Freshwater Species H  
Inhabits Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna and  
  
Karnaphuli-Sangu River Systems of Nepal, India, }  
Bangladesh. i  
  
Recognized as India's National Aquatic Animal.  
Declared State Aquatic Animal of Punjab. i  
Irrawaddy Dolphin found in India in Chilika Lake  
(Asia's Largest Brackish Water Lagoon) in Odisha.  
IUCN Conservation Status: Endangered  
  
Established in 2013 under the Bali Agreement.  
  
It permits developing nations to exceed  
the 10% ceiling of subsidy without facing legal action  
by other members temporarily.  
  
Conditions for Government  
\+ avoid distorting trade or impacting other countries’ food security  
\+ provide information to show they are meeting those conditions.  
  
Subsidies of WTO  
  
Blue Box  
  
Green Box  
  
Subsidies that do not  
distort trade, or cause  
  
Broad range of  
subsidies allowed but  
  
must be designed to  
minimise trade  
distortion  
  
minimal disruption.  
  
No limit.  
No limit.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 66  
  
\
=== PAGE 69 ===
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
What does BBNJ stand for?  
(a) Bilateral Biodiversity and National Jurisdiction (b) Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction  
(c) Biological Boundaries in National Jurisdiction (d) Binding Biodiversity Negotiation for Justice  
  
When was the UN High Seas Treaty (BBNJ Agreement) adopted?  
(a) 2020 (b) 2021 (c) 2022 (d) 2023  
  
What percentage of the world's ocean surface do high seas and international seabed areas account for?  
(a) Over half (50%) (b) Over one-third (33%)  
(c) Over two-thirds (66%) (d) Over three-quarters (75%)  
  
Under which UN conference was the BBNJ Agreement negotiated?  
  
(a) UN Climate Change Conference  
  
(b) UN Inter-Governmental Conference on Marine Biodiversity of Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction  
(c) UN Conference on Sustainable Development  
  
(d) UN Ocean Conference  
  
How many implementing agreements does UNCLOS have including BBNJ?  
(a)2 (b) 3 (c)4 (d)5  
  
What is the 1994 Agreement under UNCLOS related to?  
(a) Marine Pollution (b) Deep Seabed Mining (Part XI)  
(c) Fisheries Management (d) Territorial Waters  
  
What global biodiversity framework does BBNJ contribute to?  
(a) Paris Agreement (b) Aichi Biodiversity Targets  
(c) Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (d) Rio Declaration  
  
What is the protection target mentioned in the Kunming-Montreal Framework?  
(a) 20% of land and sea by 2025 (b) 30% of land and sea by 2030  
(c) 40% of land and sea by 2035 (d) 50% of land and sea by 2040  
  
How many pillars does the BBNJ Agreement have?  
(a) 2 (b)3 (c)4 (d)5  
  
Which of the following is NOT one of the four pillars of BBNJ Agreement?  
(a) Marine Genetic Resources (b) Environmental Impact Assessments  
(c) Climate Change Mitigation (d) Capacity Building and Technology Transfer  
  
What body is established as the decision-making body under BBNJ?  
(a) General Assembly (b) Security Council  
(c) Conference of the Parties (COP) (d) International Court of Justice  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 67  
  
\
=== PAGE 70 ===
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
20\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
How many countries have ratified the BBNJ Agreement?  
(a) 63 (b) 73 (c) 83 (d) 93  
  
What is India's status regarding the BBNJ Agreement?  
(a) Ratified (b) Signed, ratification pending  
(c) Not signed (d) Rejected  
  
When was Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana introduced?  
(a) 2018 (b) 2019 (c) 2020 (d) 2021  
  
What is the total investment for Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana?  
(a) Rs 10,050 Crores (b) Rs 15,050 Crores (c) Rs 20,050 Crores (d) Rs 25,050 Crores  
  
Under which package was Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana introduced?  
(a) Make in India (b) Digital India  
(c) Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package (d) Startup India  
  
Which is the nodal agency for Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana?  
(a) National Fisheries Development Board (b) Marine Products Export Development Authority  
(c) Coastal Aquaculture Authority (d) Central Institute of Fisheries Education  
  
When was the Blue Revolution initiative launched?  
(a) 2010 (b) 2012 (c) 2015 (d) 2018  
  
What is the Sagarmala Programme focused on?  
  
(a) Marine conservation  
  
(b) Port-led development and unlocking potential of India's maritime sector  
(c) Fisheries education  
  
(d) Coastal tourism  
  
When was the National Fisheries Policy introduced?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2018 (c) 2020 (d) 2022  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 68  
  
\
