=== PAGE 76 ===
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
Why in News?  
Key Institutional Mechanisms of National Sports Governance Act come into force from | January 2026.  
Union Government notifies National Sports Governance (National Sports Bodies) Rules 2026 to enhance Transparency,  
  
Inclusivity and Accountability in Sports Administration.  
  
Salient Features  
  
National Sports Board: Apex Regulatory Body for Sports ;\~  
  
Governance in India.  
o Powers & Functions: Grant, Renew, Suspend or Cancel  
Recognition of National Sports Bodies.  
\= Maintain a Central Register of Recognized Sports  
Bodies.  
\= Coordinate with International Sports Bodies and  
Domestic Federations.  
o Designed to curb Politicisation, Arbitrariness and Lack of  
Accountability in Sports Administration.  
  
o Composition: Chairperson and 2 Other Members  
  
\=, TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
NATIONAL SPORTS  
GOVERNANCE ACT  
  
National Sports Bodies  
National Olympic Committee: Sole |  
Governing Body for Olympic Sports in India. :  
National Paralympic Committee: Sole  
Governing Body for Paralympic Sports.  
  
Other Bodies: National Sports Federations  
& Regional Sports Federations i  
  
o TermofMembers: 3 years or up to 65 years of age, whichever is earlier.  
  
National Sports Tribunal: Established for Independent, Speedy, Effective and Cost — Efficient Resolution of Sports-related  
  
Disputes.  
  
o Headed By: A Sitting or Retired Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice ofa High Court.  
  
\= 2 Other Members: Experts in Sports, Public  
Administration or Law.  
o Jurisdiction: Election Disputes, Athlete Selection Issues,  
Governance Matters  
  
\= Appellate Authority: Supreme Court Only  
  
o Excluded Jurisdiction: Disputes arising during Major  
International Sporting (Olympic Games, Paralympic  
Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games) and  
Doping — related Disputes (Fall exclusively under  
National Anti-Doping Act 2022).  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOO@  
  
National Sports Board (Search — cum —  
Selection Committee)  
  
Function: Selection and Appointment of  
Members of National Sports Board i  
Chairperson: Cabinet Secretary :  
Members: Secretary (Ministry of Youth Affairs  
& Sports), 1 Person with experience in Sports  
Administration, 2 Recipients of National i  
  
Sports Awards.  
  
TA  
  
\
=== PAGE 77 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
e National Sports Election Panel: Central Roster of Experienced Former Election Officials.  
o Mandated to oversee Free, Fair and Transparent Elections in Sports Federations.  
o Addresses Long = Standing Issues of Conflict of Interest and Factionalism.  
e Accountability and Transparency  
o Public Authority Status: Recognized Sports Bodies deemed “Public Authorities” under RTI Act 2005.  
  
o Financial Oversight: Accounts of National Sports Board to be audited by Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
  
National Sports Governance (National Sports Bodies) Rules, 2026  
  
Every National Sports Body must have General Body and Executive Committee. H  
o Composition of General Body: Mandatory inclusion of At least 4 Sportspersons of Outstanding Merits i  
(Minimum 25 years of Age) and 50% of SOMs must be Women. i  
  
o = Women's Representation in Executive Committee: At least 4 Women Members in Executive Committee.  
  
National Sports Election Panel: Responsible for Overseeing and Conducting Elections of National Sports  
Bodies. :  
o Must consist of At Least 20 Members at All Times.  
  
Disqualification Criteria: A Person shall be Disqualified from holding office if Convicted by a Court of Law  
and Sentenced to Imprisonment. i  
  
India's Initiative to promote Sport  
  
e Nodal Ministry: Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports (Mansukh Mandaviya)  
  
e Fit India Movement (2019): Government Initiative encouraging Mass  
Participation in Fitness Activities. Khelo India Games  
© Bihar will host 7" Khelo India }  
  
e —Khelo India (2017): For Identification and Development of Athletes at . i  
Youth Games and Khelo India Para :  
  
Grassroots and Elite Levels.  
  
Games in 2025.  
  
e Khelo India Rising Talent Identification (KIRTI) Programme (2024): o —-Host 2024: Tamil Nadu i  
Aimed at School Children between 9 and 18 years to hunt talent from © 5" Khelo India Winter Games 2025 i  
Every Nook and Corner of India. will be held in Ladakh and J\&K in |  
  
2025\.  
  
e National Sports Policy: To enhance Quality of Sports Training, Promote  
  
Participation and Increase Number of Athletes competing Internationally.  
  
e Target Olympic Podium Scheme (TOPS 2014): To Identify and Support  
Athletes with potential to win medals at Olympic Games.  
  
Related Facts  
o Provides Financial Assistance for Training, Coaching, Participation ie Olympics Cancelled due to WWI: ;  
in International Competitions. Berlin (1916)  
e Mission Olympic Cell: A Body within Ministry of Youth Affairs and © Olympics Cancelled due to WWII:  
Sports to monitor and provide support for Athletes' Training and Tokyo + Helsinki (1940), London i  
  
Preparation for Olympics under TOPS.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 75  
  
\
=== PAGE 78 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
Extra Shot  
  
Indian Olympic Association: 1927 | President: PT Usha| HQ: New Delhi  
  
WADA (World Anti — Doping Agency) 2023 Report: India had Highest Positivity Rate for Banned Substances  
  
among Major Nations.  
  
o Ranked 2" globally in Doping Cases among Minors (After Russia).  
  
Athletics Integrity Unit: India is 2" in Doping Offences in Track and Field (after Kenya).  
  
Anti — Doping Frameworks  
  
National Anti — Doping Agency 2005 | Monitors Doping Control Programs | Under Ministry of Youth Affairs &  
Sports  
National Anti — Doping Act, 2022 1“ Standalone Anti — Doping Law compliance with WADA Code.  
Powers for Search, Seizure, Disciplinary Action.  
UNESCO International Convention 2005 | Urges Nations to Enact Laws to Eliminate Drug Use in Athletics | Paris |  
Against Doping in Sport 191 Countries (including India)  
Court of Arbitration for Sport 1984 | By International Olympic Committee | To provide a Fair and Quick Way to  
  
resolve disagreements in Sports World | Switzerland  
  
India's Performance in International Events  
  
Paris Olympics ended with India securing 6 Medals (1 Silver and 5 Bronze) to place 71" in Medals Tally  
  
Manu Bhaker won Bronze in Women's 10 Metre Air Pistol Event and Mixed 10 Metre Air Pistol Event.  
o —-1"Indian Woman to win a medal in Shooting.  
  
o 1" Indian and Woman to win 2 Olympic Medals in a Single Edition.  
  
Aman Sehrawat: Youngest Indian to win an Individual Olympic Medal, having secured a Bronze Medal at 2024  
Summer Olympics in Paris.  
D Gukesh: World's Youngest Chess Champion (18 Yrs), defeating China's Ding Liren in 2024 FIDE World  
Chess Championship held in Singapore. :  
o 2" Indian Grandmaster to win FIDE World Chess Championship, after Viswanathan Anand  
  
Praveen Kumar (High Jump) won Gold at 2024 Paris Paralympics.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 76  
  
\
=== PAGE 79 ===
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
From when did the Key Institutional Mechanisms of National Sports Governance Act come into force?  
(a) 1 January 2025 (b) 1 January 2026 (c) 1 April 2026 (d) 1 July 2026  
  
What are the National Sports Governance Rules 2026 designed to enhance?  
(a) Athlete performance only  
  
(b) Infrastructure development  
  
(c) Transparency, Inclusivity and Accountability in Sports Administration  
(d) International participation  
  
What is the National Sports Board?  
(a) Athletes' welfare body (b) Apex Regulatory Body for Sports Governance in India  
(c) International sports coordination body (d) Sports infrastructure development agency  
  
How many members does the National Sports Board have including the Chairperson?  
(a) 2 (b)3 (c)5 (d)7  
  
What is the term of members of the National Sports Board?  
(a) 2 years or up to 60 years of age (b) 3 years or up to 65 years of age  
(c) 4 years or up to 65 years of age (d) 5 years or up to 70 years of age  
  
Who heads the National Sports Tribunal?  
  
(a) Sports Minister  
  
(b) A sitting or retired Supreme Court Judge or Chief Justice of a High Court  
(c) Olympic medal winner  
  
(d) Sports administrator  
  
How many other members besides the head does the National Sports Tribunal have?  
(a) 1 (b)2 (c)3 (d)4  
  
What is the appellate authority for National Sports Tribunal decisions?  
(a) High Court (b) National Sports Board  
(c) Supreme Court Only (d) President of India  
  
Which disputes are excluded from National Sports Tribunal's jurisdiction?  
(a) Selection disputes only  
  
(b) Election disputes only  
  
(c) Major International Sporting Events and Doping-related Disputes  
  
(d) Financial disputes only  
  
Under which act do doping-related disputes fall?  
(a) National Sports Governance Act (b) National Anti-Doping Act 2022  
(c) Sports Authority Act (d) WADA Compliance Act  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 77  
  
\
=== PAGE 80 ===
  
Current Affairs January 2026\_Sports  
  
20\.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What is the National Sports Election Panel composed of?  
  
(a) Active election commissioners  
(c) Sports administrators  
  
(b) Central Roster of Experienced Former Election Officials  
(d) Athletes' representatives  
  
Under which act are recognized sports bodies deemed "Public Authorities"?  
  
(a) Information Act 2000  
(c) Governance Act 2010  
  
Who audits the accounts of the National Sports Board?  
  
(a) Private auditors  
(c) Comptroller and Auditor-General of India  
  
Who is the current Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports?  
  
(a) Anurag Thakur (b) Kiren Rijiju  
  
When was the Fit India Movement launched?  
(a) 2017 (b) 2018  
  
When was the Khelo India initiative launched?  
(a) 2015 (b) 2016  
  
What does KIRTI stand for?  
(a) Khelo India Rising Talent Initiative  
(c) Khelo India Recruitment and Training Initiative  
  
When was the KIRTI Programme launched?  
(a) 2022 (b) 2023  
  
What age group does the KIRTI Programme target?  
(a) 6 to 15 years (b) 8 to 16 years  
  
(b) RTI Act 2005  
(d) Transparency Act 2015  
  
(b) Ministry of Finance  
  
(d) Sports Ministry auditors  
  
(c) Mansukh Mandaviya (d) Arjun Munda  
  
(c) 2019 (d) 2020  
  
(c) 2017 (d) 2018  
  
(b) Khelo India Rising Talent Identification  
(d) Khelo India Regional Talent Identification  
  
(c) 2024 (d) 2025  
  
(c) 9 to 18 years (d) 10 to 20 years  
  
When was the Target Olympic Podium Scheme (TOPS) launched?  
  
(a) 2012 (b) 2014  
  
(c) 2016 (d) 2018  
  
FOLLOW USNOW OO@O@ 78  
  
\
