=== PAGE 33 ===
  
CENTRE APPROVED  
  
RENAMING KERALA  
AS KERALAM  
  
Why in News?  
  
Union Cabinet of India approved proposal to rename Kerala as “Keralam” under Article 3 of the Constitution.  
  
| Article 3 of the Constitution  
  
Empowers Parliament of India to reorganize States.  
Examples of State Name Changes  
  
Provides Legal Framework for altering India's Political Boundaries and State  
  
Identities. Old Name New Name | Year  
  
Madras Tamil Nadu | 1969  
Parliament can form a New State by Separating Territory from an Existing State or by | Mysore Karnataka 1973  
merging Two or More States or Parts of States. Uttaranchal | Uttarakhand | 2007  
o Increase Area of Any State, Diminish Area of Any State, Alter Boundaries of Any Orissa Odisha 2011  
  
State, Change Name of Any State  
  
Procedure for changing Name of a State  
  
President's Recommendation (Mandatory): A Bill for renaming a State can be introduced in Parliament only  
  
with prior recommendation of President.  
  
o President of India acts on advice of Union Government.  
  
Reference to State Legislature: President refers Bill to Concerned State Legislature.  
o State Legislature can express its views within a specified period.  
  
o State Legislature's Opinion is Not Binding.  
  
Parliamentary Approval: Bill is passed by Simple Majority in Both Houses of Parliament.  
  
No Special Majority or Constitutional Amendmentis required.  
  
Union and its Territory  
  
“Article 1 to 4” under “Part 1” of Constitution deal with Union and Its Territory.  
India is described as "Union" although its Constitution is "Federal" in Structure.  
  
Names of States and Union Territories and their Territorial Extent are mentioned in "1st Schedule" of the Constitution. At  
present, there are 28 States and 8 Union Territories.  
  
Article 1  
  
"Article 1" describes "India, that is, Bharat" as a "Union of States" rather than a "Federation of States".  
  
o Deals with2 Things: "Name of the Country" and "Type of Polity".  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 31  
  
\
=== PAGE 34 ===
  
Current Affairs March 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
Article 2  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Extra Shots: Sikkim  
"Article 2" empowers "Parliament" to "Admit into Union of India Sikkim became a "Protectorate of India in  
or establish New States" on such terms and conditions as it thinks 1950" following "Indo —Sikkimese Treaty". j  
fit. o India assuming responsibility for External  
Grants 2 Powers to Parliament: Relations, Defense and Strategic i  
  
Communications of Sikkim.  
  
2 P blish New $ On 16 May 1975, Indian Parliament passed  
\+ Powgpto establish New States. 36" Amendment, which formally recognized |  
Sikkim as 22" State of Indian Union. i  
  
Ne 1D; led Sikki  
  
1\. Power to admit into Union of India New States.  
  
1“ refers to Admission of States which are already in existence,  
  
il 1975.  
  
while 2™ refers to Establishment of States which were Not in  
existence before.  
  
Note: Article 2 relates to Admission or Establishment of New States that are Extra Shots  
  
Not Part of Union of India. | e In 1953, Gol was forced to create ri  
  
Article 4 i Linguistic State, known as Andhra |  
  
State, by separating Telugu speaking  
Article 4) declares that laws made for Admission or Establishment of New Areas from Madras State. i  
  
States (Article 2) and Formation of New States and Alteration of Areas, © This followed a prolonged popular  
  
Boundaries or Names of Existing States (Articles 3) are Not to be i agitation and death of "Potti\!  
considered as Amendments of the Constitution under Article 368. i Sriramulu", a Congress person of i  
© This means that such laws can be passed by a "Simple Majority" and standing, after a "56 — day Hunger |  
  
100" Constitutional Amendment Act (2015)  
  
Enacted to give effect to acquiring of certain territories by India and transfer of certain other territories to i  
  
Bangladesh in pursuance of agreement and its protocol entered into between Governments of India and i  
Bangladesh. i  
  
Under this deal, India transferred 111 enclaves to Bangladesh, while Bangladesh transferred 51 enclaves to  
  
Integration of Princely States|  
  
At the time of independence, India comprised Two Categories of Political Units, namely, "British Provinces" and "Princely  
States".  
  
Indian Independence Act (1947) created 2 Independent Separate Dominions of India and Pakistan and gave 3 Options to Princely  
States viz., Joining India, Joining Pakistan or Remaining Independent.  
  
Of 552 Princely States situated within Geographical Boundaries of India, 549 joined India and remaining 3 (Hyderabad,  
Junagarh and Kashmir) refused to join India.  
  
o However, in course of time, they were also integrated with India "Hyderabad by means of Police Action", "Junagarh by  
  
means of Referendum" and "Kashmir by Instrument of Accession".  
In 1950, Constitution contained a 4 — fold Classification of States and Territories of Indian Union.  
o PartA:9 erstwhile Governor's Provinces of British India.  
o Part B:9 erstwhile Princely States with Legislatures.  
o Part C: Erstwhile Chief Commissioner's Provinces of British India and some of the erstwhile Princely States.  
  
o Andaman and Nicobar Islands were kept as solitary Part D Territories.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 32  
  
\
=== PAGE 35 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs March 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
Dhar Commission  
  
In June 1948, Government of India appointed "Linguistic Provinces Commission" under chairmanship of "SK i  
  
Dhar" to examine feasibility of Reorganisation of States on basis of Linguistic Factor.  
  
o Submitted its report in Dec, 1948.  
  
Recommended Reorganisation of States on basis of Administrative Convenience rather than Linguistic Factor.  
  
JVP Committee  
  
2" Linguistic Provinces Committee by Congress in Dec, 1948, itself to examine feasibility of Reorganisation of  
  
States on basis of Linguistic Factor afresh.  
  
Consisted of "Jawaharlal Nehru", "Vallahbhai Patel", "Pattabhi Sitaramayya" and hence, was popularly  
  
known as "JVP Committee".  
  
o = Submitted its report in April, 1949.  
  
Formally Rejected Language as the Basis for Reorganisation of States.  
  
Fazl Ali Commission  
  
Creation of Andhra State intensified demand from other regions for Creation of States on Linguistic Basis.  
  
This forced Government of India to appoint a "3 Member" States Reorganisation Commission under i  
  
chairmanship of "Fazl Ali" to re— examine whole question in Dec 1953.  
  
o Other 2 Members: KM Panikkar, HN Kunzru.  
  
Submitted its report in Sep 1955 and broadly accepted language as basis of reorganisation of states.  
  
o Butitrejected theory of "One Language — One State".  
  
o Commission suggested Abolition of 4 — fold Classification of States and Territories under Original  
Constitution and Creation of 16 States and 3 Centrally Administered Territories.  
  
th  
  
By States Reorganisation Act (1956) and 7" Constitutional Amendment Act (1956), 14 States and 6 Union Territories i  
  
were created on Nov 1, 1956.  
  
Ab: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
an Defence  
  
e India inaugurated restored Chungthang — Lachen Axis and 400 ft Taram Chu Bailey Suspension Bridge to boost connectivity  
in Border Areas North Sikkim.  
  
o Bailey Bridge: Portable Modular Steel Truss Bridge developed by United Kingdom during World War II for Rapid  
Military Deployment and Logistics.  
  
e Indian Navy set to commission INS Taragiri at Visakhapatnam.  
o INS Taragiri: Indigenous Stealth Guided — Missile Frigate of Nilgiri — class (Project 17A), built by Mazagon Dock  
Shipbuilders Limited with over 75% Local Content.  
  
e Indian Navy to commission 3“ Anti— Submarine Warfare Ship INS Anjadip, named after Anjadip Island (Lakshadweep), built  
by Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers (Kolkata).  
  
e 11" Exercise LAMITIYE underway at Seychelles Defence Academy enhancing India— Seychelles Defence Cooperation.  
e India participated in Exercise Sea Dragon 2026 held in Guam.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 33  
  
\
=== PAGE 36 ===
  
Current Affairs March 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
10\.  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Which body approved the proposal to rename Kerala as "Keralam"?  
(a) Supreme Court of India (b) Kerala State Legislature  
(c) Union Cabinet of India (d) Election Commission of India  
  
Under which Article of the Indian Constitution was the renaming of Kerala approved?  
(a) Article 1 (b) Article 2 (c) Article 3 (d) Article 4  
  
What does Article 3 of the Indian Constitution primarily empower?  
(a) The President to declare a National Emergency (b) The Supreme Court to resolve inter-state disputes  
(c) Parliament to reorganise States (d) The Governor to dissolve State Assemblies  
  
Which of the following powers is NOT granted under Article 3?  
(a) Alter boundaries of any State (b) Change name of any State  
(c) Diminish area of any State (d) Merge India with a foreign territory  
  
Articles | to 4 fall under which Part of the Indian Constitution?  
(a) Part IL (b) Part III (c) Part I (d) Part IV  
  
What is the title of Part I of the Indian Constitution?  
(a) Fundamental Rights (b) Directive Principles  
(c) Union and its Territory (d) Citizenship  
  
Article 1 of the Constitution describes India as a:  
(a) Federation of States (b) Confederation of States  
  
(c) Union of States (d) Commonwealth of States  
  
Article 1 deals with which two things?  
  
(a) Citizenship and Sovereignty (b) Territory and Defence  
(c) Name of the Country and Type of Polity (d) Legislature and Executive  
  
Which Article empowers Parliament to admit new States into the Union of India?  
(a) Article 1 (b) Article 3 (c) Article 2 (d) Article 4  
  
What is the key distinction between the two powers granted under Article 2?  
  
(a) One applies to states, the other to Union Territories  
  
(b) One requires a referendum, the other does not  
  
(c) One refers to admission of already-existing states; the other to establishing new states  
(d) One requires Presidential assent, the other does not  
  
According to Article 4, laws made under Articles 2 and 3 are NOT considered amendments under which Article?  
(a) Article 356 (b) Article 370 (c) Article 352 (d) Article 368  
  
What legislative majority is required to pass laws under Articles 2 and 3, as clarified by Article 4?  
(a) Two-thirds majority (b) Special majority (c) Simple majority (d) Unanimous consent  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 34  
  
\
=== PAGE 37 ===
  
Current Affairs March 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
20\.  
  
3\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Where are the names of States and Union Territories and their territorial extent mentioned in the Constitution?  
(a) Second Schedule (b) Third Schedule (c) First Schedule (d) Seventh Schedule  
  
As of now, how many States and Union Territories does India have?  
(a) 29 States and 7 UTs (b) 27 States and9 UTs = (c) 28 Statesand 8 UTs\_—\_(d) 30 States and 6 UTs  
  
At the time of Indian Independence, how many Princely States were situated within the geographical boundaries of  
India?  
(a) 500 (b) 530 (c) 552 (d) 575  
  
How many of the 552 Princely States initially refused to join India?  
(a) 2 (b) 3 (c) 5 (d)7  
  
Which three Princely States initially refused to join India?  
(a) Mysore, Travancore, and Kashmir (b) Hyderabad, Junagarh, and Kashmir  
(c) Gwalior, Baroda, and Hyderabad (d) Bikaner, Junagarh, and Travancore  
  
By what means was Hyderabad integrated into India?  
(a) Referendum (b) Instrument of Accession  
(c) Police Action (d) Treaty of Merger  
  
Kashmir's integration with India was achieved through:  
(a) Police Action (b) Referendum  
(c) Parliamentary Resolution (d) Instrument of Accession  
  
In the 1950 Constitution, which territory was kept as a solitary Part D Territory?  
(a) Lakshadweep (b) Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
(c) Pondicherry (d) Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 35  
  
\
