=== PAGE 5 ===
  
{April 2026  
\=. TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
VISIT OF VICE PRESIDENT  
C. P. RADHAKRISHNAN  
TO SRI LANKA  
  
Why in News?  
  
C. P. Radhakrishnan made Ist — ever Bilateral Visit to Sri Lanka, holds talks with Anura Kumara Dissanayake in Colombo.  
  
Key Highlights of Visit aa aaa :  
OCI Scheme  
  
e Introduced: 2005 (via amendment to  
Citizenship Act, 1955)  
  
e Nature: Multiple — Entry, Lifelong  
Visa for Persons of Indian Origin  
  
e Merger of PIO & OCI Scheme in  
2015\.  
  
¢ Completion of Phase III of Indian Housing Project  
  
th th  
  
e Extended Overseas Citizen of India eligibility from 4" Generation to 6  
Generation.  
  
e MoUs signed under Multi — Sectoral Grant Assistance Programme focus  
areas Healthcare and Women's Empowerment.  
  
e — Sri Lanka joins International Big Cat Alliance.  
  
India — Sri Lanka: Areas of Cooperation  
  
Economic Cooperation Sri Lanka at a Glance  
  
e India has been Sri Lanka's e Capital: Colombo (Executive), Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte (Legislature)  
Largest Trade Partner and e PM: Harini Amarasuriya  
Largest Source of Tourists. e President: Anura Kumara Dissanayake  
  
e = India — Sri Lanka FTA was e Currency: Sri Lankan Rupee  
signed in 2000. e Border Name: Palk Strait  
  
Development Cooperation  
  
e Support in development of Trincomalee as a Regional Energy and Industrial Hub.  
e India and Sri Lanka jointly commission Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre in Sri Lanka.  
¢ Construction of Sampur Solar Power Plant in Sri Lanka.  
  
Joint Exercises  
SLINEX (Naval), MITRA SHAKTI (Army), MILAN  
(Multi — Lateral Naval Exercise)  
  
13 Amendment of Sri— Lankan  
Constitution  
  
Multi — Lateral Cooperation  
  
BIMSTEC, SAARC, Colombo Security Conclave,  
Indian Ocean Rim Association.  
  
Liberation Tigers of Tamil  
Eelam  
  
e Formed in 1976 as Self-— styled  
"National Freedom Movement  
of People of Tamil Eelam".  
  
e Undertook Terrorist Activities  
in Sri Lanka especially against  
Sinhalese and executed  
  
Chinese Strategic Presence in Sri  
Lanka  
  
China's Growing Influence in Sri  
Lanka through Financial Aid and  
Hambantota Port.  
Chinese Vessels Shi Yan — 6 and  
‘Yuan Wang — 5 Conduct Data  
Collection, Potentially  
  
Led to Creation of Provincial }  
Councils, assured a Power — Sharing  
Arrangement to All 9  
Provinces in Sri Lanka, including |e  
Sinhala Majority Areas, to Self —  
Govern.  
  
enable  
  
Assassination of Rajiv Gandhi  
(Ex — Prime Minister of India).  
  
Supporting Military Operations  
Against India.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com |  
  
FOLLOW USNOW BOIO@  
  
03  
  
\
=== PAGE 6 ===
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
1\.  
  
3\.  
  
4\.  
  
Katchatheevu Island Dispute  
  
Katchatheevu is an Uninhabited 285 — acre Island located in Palk Strait  
between India and Sri Lanka.  
  
Ownership of Katchatheevu, once part of Madras Presidency, remained a  
Point of Dispute between India and Sri Lanka until 1974.  
  
o Ceylon's (Sri Lanka) Claim: Initially ruled by Jaffna Kingdom of Sri  
Lanka in Early Medieval Period.  
  
o Sri Lanka claimed Sovereignty over Katchatheevu on ground that  
Portuguese who had occupied Island during 1505 — 1658 CE had  
exercised jurisdiction over the islet.  
  
o. Madras (India's) Claim: Control later shifted to Ramnad Zamindari  
  
under Nayak Dynasty of Madurai in 17" Century.  
  
Indo — Sri Lankan Maritime Agreement 1974: India Government, headed  
by Indira Gandhi, agreed to cede Katchatheevu Island to Sri Lanka.  
  
o Aimwasto Settle Discord and Strengthen ties with Sri Lanka.  
  
o Agreement allowed Indian Fishermen Continued Access to  
  
Katchatheevu.  
  
Additional Agreement of 1976: Prevented Both Countries from Fishing in  
Each Other's Exclusive Economic Zones, with Katchatheevu positioned at  
Boundary of these zones.  
  
Post — 2009 Sri Lanka Civil War, tensions rise over Indian Fishermen in Sri  
Lankan Waters, leading to Arrests, Torture Allegations and renewed  
Katchatheevu demands.  
  
PIO VS OCI  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Extra Shots  
  
e Island's Sole Structure is St. Anthony's  
Church  
  
e Island was formed as a Result of  
  
Volcanic Eruption in 14" century. '  
e Other Maritime Disputes of India '  
o Sir Creek with Pakistan. '  
  
o New Moore Island with Bangladesh  
  
A PERSON OF INDIAN ORIGIN (PIO)  
  
Means a foreign citizen (except a national of Pakistan,  
Afghanistan Bangladesh, China, Iran, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and  
Nepal)  
  
A foreign citizen whose one of the parents/grandparents/great  
grandparents was born and a permanent resident of India  
  
Who is a spouse ofa citizen of India ora PIO  
  
BENEFITS  
  
P10 card holders do not require a visa to visit India for a period of  
15 years from the date of issue of the PIO card.  
  
They are exempted from registration at FRRO/FRO if their stay  
does not exceeds 180 days, In case if the stay exceeds 180 days,  
they shall have to register with FRRO/ FRO within the next 30  
days  
  
They enjoy parity with NRIs in economic, financial and  
educational benefits  
  
All future benefits that would be exempted to NRIs would also  
be available to the PIO card holders  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099  
  
OVERSEAS CITIZEN OF INDIA (OCI)  
  
A foreign national, who was eligible to become citizen of India  
on 26.01.1950 or was a citizen of India on or at anytime after  
26.01.1950 or belonged to a territory that became part of India  
after 15.08.1947 is eligible for registration as Overseas Citizen  
of India (OCI). Minor children of such person are also eligible  
for OCI. However, if the applicant had ever been a citizen of  
Pakistan or Bangladesh, he/she will not be eligible for OCI.  
  
BENEFITS  
  
OCIs are entitled to a multipurpose, multiple entry, lifelong visa  
  
allowing them to visit India at any time, for any length of time  
  
and for any purpose  
  
« Exempted from police reporting for any length of stay in the  
country  
  
« Have also been granted all rights in the economic, financial  
and education fields in parity with NRIs except, the right to  
acquisition of agricultural or plantation properties  
  
04  
  
\
=== PAGE 7 ===
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
10\.  
  
1\.  
  
12\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
With whom did C.P. Radhakrishnan hold talks during his visit to Sri Lanka?  
(a) Harini Amarasuriya (b) Ranil Wickremesinghe  
(c) Anura Kumara Dissanayake (d) Mahinda Rajapaksa  
  
Which international alliance did Sri Lanka join during the VP's visit?  
(a) International Solar Alliance (b) Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure  
(c) International Big Cat Alliance (d) Global Green Infrastructure Alliance  
  
What is India's trade status with respect to Sri Lanka?  
(a) India is Sri Lanka's 3rd largest trade partner (b) India is Sri Lanka's largest trade partner  
(c) India is Sri Lanka's 2nd largest trade partner (d) India is Sri Lanka's largest trade partner  
  
In which year was the India—Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement signed?  
(a) 1995 (b) 1998 (c) 2000 (d) 2005  
  
Which city is the capital of Sri Lanka and also the seat of its Executive?  
(a) Kandy (b) Kotte (c) Jaffna (d) Colombo  
  
Which city houses Sri Lanka's Legislature (Parliament)?  
(a) Colombo (b) Jaffna  
(c) Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte (d) Trincomalee  
  
What is the name of the sea boundary between India and Sri Lanka?  
(a) Gulf of Mannar (b) Palk Strait (c) Lakshadweep Sea (d) Nine Degree Channel  
  
Which city in Sri Lanka is India supporting to develop as a Regional Energy and Industrial Hub?  
(a) Colombo (b) Jaffna (c) Trincomalee (d) Galle  
  
Which joint naval exercise is conducted between India and Sri Lanka?  
(a) MITRA SHAKTI (b) MILAN (c) SLINEX (d) TASMAN SABER  
  
MITRA SHAKTI is a joint exercise between India and Sri Lanka involving which branch of the armed forces?  
(a) Navy (b) Air Force (c) Army (d) Coast Guard  
  
When was the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) formed?  
(a) Formed in 1972 (b) Formed in 1976 (c) Formed in 1980 (d) Formed in 1983  
  
What did the 13th Amendment to the Sri Lankan Constitution lead to?  
(a) Abolition of the Executive Presidency  
  
(b) Creation of Provincial Councils with power-sharing arrangement  
  
(c) Introduction of proportional representation in parliamentary elections  
(d) Recognition of Tamil as an official language of Sri Lanka  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 05  
  
\
=== PAGE 8 ===
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_International Relations and News  
  
13\.  
  
14\.  
  
15\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What is Katchatheevu and where is it located?  
  
(a) A 500-acre inhabited island in the Gulf of Mannar  
  
(b) An uninhabited 285-acre island located in the Palk Strait between India and Sri Lanka  
(c) A 150-acre fishing island in the Lakshadweep Sea  
  
(d) An uninhabited 400-acre island in the Arabian Sea  
  
Under which agreement and under which Indian PM did India cede Katchatheevu Island to Sri Lanka?  
(a) Indo-Sri Lanka Accord 1987 under Rajiv Gandhi  
  
(b) Indo-Sri Lankan Maritime Agreement 1974 under Indira Gandhi  
  
(c) Simla Agreement 1972 under Indira Gandhi  
  
(d) Indo-Sri Lanka Peace Treaty 1965 under Lal Bahadur Shastri  
  
What concern does China's growing presence in Sri Lanka raise for India, specifically regarding Chinese vessels Shi  
Yan-6 and Yuan Wang-5?  
  
(a) They are being used to establish a Chinese naval base in Colombo  
  
(b) They conduct data collection, potentially supporting military operations against India  
  
(c) They are used to monitor India's nuclear installations  
  
(d) They are transporting Chinese military personnel to Sri Lanka  
  
\_ QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
‘I Polity and Governance  
  
¢ Odisha became 1" State to operationalise Marine Spatial Planning, implemented with National Centre for Coastal  
Research under Ministry of Earth Sciences.  
  
o. Marine Spatial Planning is a Scientific, Data— driven Framework for allocating Ocean Space among Economic,  
  
Environmental and Social Uses while ensuring Ecological Sustainability  
  
e Vishwa Sutra (Weaves of India for the World) launched by Ministry of Textiles in collaboration with National  
  
Institute of Fashion Technology.  
  
o Vishwa Sutra is a Design — led Project reinterpreting Traditional Indian Handlooms with Global Inspirations to  
  
Position India's Textiles in International Fashion Markets.  
  
e Meghalaya Cabinet (CM: Conrad Kongkal Sangma) approved Meghalaya Official Languages Ordinance 2026,  
  
declaring Khasi and Garo are Official State Languages alongside English.  
  
o Under Meghalaya State Language Act 2005, English was Sole Official Language while Khasi and Garo held  
  
Only Associate Official Status.  
  
e e\~—SafeHER Programme launched by Centre for Development of Advanced Computing and Reliance Foundation to  
  
promote Cybersecurity Awareness.  
o e-—SafeHER aims to train 1 Million Rural Women as 'Cyber Sakhis' by 2029, enabling Safe and Confident  
Digital Participation.  
e Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved investment for Kalai — II Hydro Electric Project in Arunachal  
Pradesh (Lohit River).  
o \_Lohit River originated in Eastern Tibet, enters India at Kibithu, and is a Tributary of Brahmaputra River, known  
as “River of Blood” (due to Red Laterite Sediments).  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 06  
  
\
