=== PAGE 61 ===
  
NASA's Artemis  
ll Mission  
  
Why in News?  
  
NASA launched Artemis I, 1st Human Lunar Mission since Apollo Program.  
  
e 1°Crewed Flight of Orion spacecraft under NASA's Artemis Programme.  
o NASA's Last Mission to Moon was Apollo 17 (1972).  
  
e Crew: 4 Astronauts includes Reid Wiseman (Commander), Victor Glover (1“ Person of Colour), Christina Koch (1" Woman)  
  
and Jeremy Hansen (1“ Canadian and Non— American).  
  
e Artemis II will Not land on Moon; instead, spacecraft will perform a Lunar Flyby, in which astronauts will travel around  
  
Moon and return to Earth without landing on lunar surface.  
o Mission is expected to last about 10 Days, following a Free — Return Trajectory around Moon before splashing down in  
  
Pacific Ocean.  
e International Collaboration: European Space Agency, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Canadian Space Agency  
e Launch Vehicle: Space Launch System  
e Spacecraft: Orion Spacecraft  
  
e Launch Site: Kennedy Space Center (Florida, USA)  
  
‘crew module  
  
@ Littorr © Proximity operations © Return to earth  
  
© lowearth orbit =” = @ Transtunar injection @® service madule separation  
  
© Perigee raise maneuver @) Outbound coasting phase @) crew module reentry  
  
(4) Apogee raise burn Cs ) Lunar flyby, (12) Splashdown  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FollowusNow B@O@ 57  
  
\
=== PAGE 62 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_S\&T, Defence, Space  
  
Artemis  
  
e Named after Moon Goddess (Greek Mythology).  
  
¢ Objective: To Land Humans on the Moon by 2025, including 1‘\* Woman (Christina Koch) and Person of Colour (Victor  
Glover) on Lunar Surface.  
o Establishment of a Lunar Gateway Station is planned for 2029.  
  
o Serve as a Docking Point for Astronauts and facilitate Scientific Research.  
  
Artemis — I Artemis — II Artemis — III  
e Unmanned Mission to Moon e —Crewed Lunar Flyby Mission e Human Return to Moon.  
e Began with Launch of Spacecraft named e Mission will involve a Lunar e = Mark as "Astronauts Return to  
"Orion" on "Space Launch System”. Fly by and Return to Earth. the Moon".  
  
Artemis Accords  
  
e Announced by NASA in 2020.  
e Established by US State Department and NASA with 7 Other Founding Members.  
o Australia, Canada, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom.  
e Set of Principles and Guidelines for International Cooperation in Space Exploration.  
e Purpose: For setting Common Principles to govern Civil Exploration & Use of Outer Space, the Moon, Mars, Comets and  
Asteroids, for Peaceful Purposes.  
o Builds upon Foundation of Outer Space Treaty of 1967.  
e Nature: Not Legally Binding.  
e Members: 63 Countries  
o India joined in 2023 as 27"" Member.  
o Russia and China are Not Part of Artemis Accords.  
  
Humans in Space  
  
e 1% Human in Space was Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin (Soviet Union's Vostok on 12 April 1961).  
¢ On5 May 1961, Alan Shepard became 1\* American in Space, as part of Project Mercury.  
  
e 1 Woman to ever enter Space was Valentina Tereshkova (1963).  
  
e 1 Indian Astronaut in Space was Rakesh Sharma (Soyuz T— 11 on 3 April 1984).  
  
e 2" Indian in Space and I“ on ISS was Shubhanshu Shukla. (Axiom — 4 in 2025).  
  
e 1° Chinese Taikonaut: Yang Liwei (Shenzhou 5, On 15 Oct 2003).  
  
e Rayyanah Barnawi: 1 Arab Woman Astronaut to go to Space.  
  
e 1“ Indian Space Tourist: Gopi Thotokura  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 58  
  
\
=== PAGE 63 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_S\&T, Defence, Space  
  
Gaganyaan Mission  
  
Gaganyaan Project to launch 3 — Person Crew on 3-Day Mission to 400 km Orbit.  
  
e India’s 1 Human Spaceflight Program.  
  
e 4" Nation after United States, Russia and China.  
  
¢ Comprising Crew Module and Service Module.  
  
e Training: Human Space Flight Centre (Bengaluru)  
  
¢ Out of 4 Astronaut Designates (Vyomnauts), 3 will be selected for  
Final Mission.  
  
¢ — Total Cost: 10000 Crore BALANASHNANNAR KRISHNAN  
  
e Launch Vehicle: GSLV Mk III (LVM 3)  
  
e Developed By: ISRO  
  
Congratulations and best wishes to all four of them\!  
  
Vyommitra  
  
e Woman Robot Astronaut (Half Humanoid)  
o Vyommitra: Vyoma = Space, Mitra = Friend  
  
e Fly into Space ahead of ISRO’s Gaganyaan  
Mission.  
  
e¢ Developed by: ISRO Inertial Systems Unit &  
Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre  
  
e Equipped with capability to monitor Module  
  
Parameters, issue Alerts and execute Life Support  
Operations.  
  
SAKHI App  
  
e SAKHI stands for Space — borne Assistant and Knowledge Hub  
for Crew Interaction  
  
e Developed By: Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre  
  
¢ Monitor Health of Astronauts.  
  
e Help them Stay Connected with Earth  
  
e Alert them about their Dietary Schedules.  
  
e Keep Crew connected with Onboard Computer and Ground —  
  
based Stations.  
  
Scan the code  
to download  
the answer key  
of this month's  
magazine.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 59  
  
\
=== PAGE 64 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_S\&T, Defence, Space  
  
Chandrayaan Missions  
  
Chandrayaan - 1 Chandrayaan — 2 Chandrayaan — 3  
¢ India’s 1“ Lunar Mission. ¢ Launched in 2019. ¢ Launched in 2023.  
e Launched in 2008. o Orbiter of Moon, Vikram o 2™ Attempt after Chandrayaan — 2.  
© Mapped Moon's Surface in Lander and Pragyan (Wisdom) o Orbiter of Moon, Vikram Lander,  
Unprecedented Detail, e Lander (Vikram) crashed at Pragyan (Wisdom) Rover  
discovering Water Ice in Polar “Tiranga Point’. e Launch Vehicle: GSLV Mark III (LVM3)  
Craters. e Launch Vehicle: GSLV — Mk 3 e Landing Point: Shiv Shakti  
  
e© Crash Site was named e Landing Site: South Pole  
  
Jawahar Point.  
  
NOTE: With Chandrayaan — 3, India became 1\* Nation to Soft — Land on Surface of Lunar South Pole and 4" to do a Soft  
  
Landing anywhere on Earth’s Natural Satellite.  
  
Chandrayaan — 4 Mission  
  
¢ India’s 4" Mission to Moon is slated for launch in 2028.  
e Aim: To bring Rock Samples from Lunar Surface back to Earth after a Soft Landing.  
e Mission includes —  
  
o Spacecraft Development and Realisation  
  
o 2 Launches of Launch Vehicle Mark — 3 (LVM — 3)  
  
o External Deep Space Network Support  
  
o Conducting Special Tests for Design Validation  
  
Chandrayaan — 5 / Lunar Polar Exploration (LUPAX)  
  
e Joint Initiative of ISRO (India) and JAXA (Japan).  
o Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) responsible for Lunar Rover.  
o Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) handling Lander.  
o. Instruments from NASA and European Space Agency will also be mounted on Rover.  
  
e Aim: Exploring Moon for Water and Other Resources.  
  
Landing on the Moon Odysseus  
e 1 Nation: Soviet Union (Luna 9, 1966) ¢ — 1° Soft Lunar Landing by a Private Company.  
\* 2"\! Nation: United States (Apollo Mission, 1969), o 2™ Private Attempt after Peregrine Lander's Failure.  
put 1“ Man on Moon. e Developed by: Intuitive Machines (USA)  
e 3" Nation: China (Chang’e Mission, 2013) e Lander: Nova—C  
e 5" Nation: Japan (SLIM — Smart Lander for e Launch Vehicle: Falcon 9  
  
Investigating Moon, 2024)  
  
Extra Shots  
  
e United States is also Only Country to Land Humans on Moon.  
  
e Neil Armstrong became 1“ Person to step onto the Moon. He was joined by Edwin 'Buzz' Aldrin.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 60  
  
\
=== PAGE 65 ===
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_S\&T, Defence, Space — Tutorial —  
  
LAW PREP  
  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
What milestone does NASA's Artemis II mission represent?  
  
(a) First unmanned mission to land on the Moon since Apollo 17  
(b) First Human Lunar Mission since the Apollo Program  
  
(c) First mission to establish a permanent lunar base  
  
(d) First joint India-NASA Moon mission  
  
What was NASA's last mission to the Moon before Artemis II?  
(a) Apollo 15 (1971) (b) Apollo 16 (1972) (c) Apollo 17 (1972) (d) Apollo 18 (1973)  
  
Who is the Commander of the Artemis II mission?  
(a) Victor Glover (b) Christina Koch (c) Jeremy Hansen (d) Reid Wiseman  
  
Which Artemis II crew member is the first person of colour to fly on a lunar mission?  
(a) Reid Wiseman (b) Jeremy Hansen (c) Victor Glover (d) Christina Koch  
  
Which Artemis II crew member made history as the first woman on a lunar mission?  
(a) Valentina Tereshkova (b) Christina Koch (c) Sally Ride (d) Kalpana Chawla  
  
Which crew member of Artemis II is the first Canadian and non-American to fly on a lunar mission?  
(a) Reid Wiseman (b) Victor Glover (c) Christina Koch (d) Jeremy Hansen  
  
What type of mission is Artemis I\] — will it land on the Moon?  
(a) Yes, it will land at the lunar south pole (b) No, it will perform a Lunar Flyby  
(c) Yes, it will land near the Shiv Shakti point (d) No, it will orbit the Moon for 30 days and return  
  
How long is the Artemis II mission expected to last, and where will it splash down?  
(a) 7 days, Atlantic Ocean b) 14 days, Indian Ocean  
(c) 10 days, Pacific Ocean (d) 21 days, Gulf of Mexico  
  
\>  
  
From which launch site did the Artemis II mission lift off?  
(a) Cape Canaveral Space Force Station (b) Vandenberg Space Force Base  
(c) Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA (d) Johnson Space Center, Texas, USA  
  
When were the Artemis Accords announced, and how many founding members did they have besides the USA?  
(a) Announced in 2018; 5 other founding members (b) Announced in 2020; 7 other founding members  
(c) Announced in 2022; 10 other founding members —\_(d) Announced in 2019; 6 other founding members  
  
What is India's Gaganyaan Mission?  
(a) India's first lunar mission (b) India's first Human Spaceflight Programme  
(c) India's first Mars mission (d) India's first deep-space mission  
  
What is Vyommitra?  
(a) A lunar rover (b) A woman robot astronaut (half humanoid)  
(c) A satellite communication system (d) An Al-based mission control system  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | Frollowusnow 8B@O@ 61  
  
\
=== PAGE 66 ===
  
Current Affairs April 2026\_S\&T, Defence, Space  
  
13\.  
  
14\.  
  
15\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
What does SAKHI stand for?  
  
(a) Space And Knowledge Hub for Indian astronauts  
  
(b) Space-borne Assistant and Knowledge Hub for Crew Interaction  
(c) Satellite-Aided Knowledge and Health Intelligence  
  
(d) Space Astronaut Knowledge Hub for India  
  
Who was the first Indian astronaut in space?  
(a) Shubhanshu Shukla (b) Rakesh Sharma  
(c) Kalpana Chawla (d) Ravish Malhotra  
  
What achievement did Chandrayaan-3 accomplish that made India unique?  
  
(a) India became the first nation to land on the lunar north pole  
  
(b) India became the first nation to conduct a soft landing on the lunar south pole  
(c) India became the first Asian nation to bring back lunar samples  
  
(d) India became the first nation to deploy a rover on the far side of the Moon  
  
Dear Lpt’ ians  
  
entic and valuable material by putting in lot  
ful and it would not  
  
And they-will create competition for you without being the of Law  
  
prep. To prevent this unfair ity, be vigilant and inform u ou find  
  
usage of Law Prep mz is illegal \_and  
ment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
  
Copyright Act of 1957.  
  
Feel free to be in touch for  
suggestions/feedback/complaints/compliments, at: 94141 43101  
  
A: QUICKBYTE-NEWS IN A MINUTE |  
YI Person in News  
  
Samrat Choudhary sworn in as 24" CM of Bihar, 1" BJP Leader to hold Post, with oath administered by Bihar Governor  
Syed Ata Hasnain.  
  
Vijay Kumar Choudhary and Bijendra Prasad Yadav were sworn in as Deputy CM of Bihar.  
  
Kerala's N. Alim Yusuf honoured with World Wide Fund for Nature National Award at National ECHO Youth  
Innovation Summit 2026 in Hyderabad.  
  
o Hehonoured for developing 'NeophyteID', an AI— powered App to detect Invasive Plant Species in Kerala.  
Russia's 1“ Deputy PM Denis Manturov visited India to co-chair India-Russia Inter-Governmental Commission on  
Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technological and Cultural Cooperation (IRIGC —TEC).  
  
UP's Divya Singh became 1” Indian Woman to reach Mount Everest Base Camp by Bicycle, 2nd Women globally after  
Tammat Bil Khoar (Bangladesh).  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 62  
  
\
