=== PAGE 26 ===
  
. \_ February 2026  
  
\=, TOPIC  
in NEWS  
  
YUMNAM KHEMCHAND  
SINGH SWORN IN AS  
CHIEF MINISTER  
OF MANIPUR  
  
Why in News?  
  
President Droupadi Murmu revokesd President's Rule in Manipur, clearded path for Elected Government after nearly  
One Year.  
  
Yumnam Khemchand Singh (BJP) sworned in as 13" Manipur Chief Minister; 2 Deputy CMs Nemcha Kipgen (Kuki-Zo  
MLA from Kangpokpi Constituency) and Losii Dikho (Naga MLA From Mao Constituency) took Oath.  
  
ic Conflicts in Manipur  
  
Violence Erupts Between Kuki-Zomi Tribals and Meitei Community, First Clash in Three Decades in Manipur.  
  
Historical Factors responsible for Violence in Manipur  
  
e Meiteis, comprising 52% of Population, Predominantly History of Manipur  
Reside in Valley Areas Covering Just 10% of Manipur. ¢ In 1891, Manipur became a Princely State under  
  
o Meiteis Hold 40 of 60 Assembly Seats in Manipur. British Rule after Anglo-Manipur War.  
Hill Areas, Covering 89% of Manipur's Land, Have | ¢ In 1947, Maharaja Budhachandra signed a Treaty of  
  
Only 20 MLAs in Assembly. Sparking Discontent. Accession merging Manipur into India.  
\* Meiteis Restricted from Purchasing Land in 90% of | ® Manipur became a Union Territory in 1956 and in  
  
Manipur, While Tribals Can Buy Land in Imphal Valley. 1o.72.itwas, granted, status.ofEullfledged State.  
  
Issues in Delimitation Application of AFSPA In flux of Migrants  
  
Meitei Community Raises Concems Over | Implementation of Armed Forces | Myanmar Coup Triggers Refugee  
Inaccurate Census Figures in 2020 | (Special Powers) Act Grants | Crisis in India's North-East. Meitei  
Delimitation Process in Manipur Extensive Powers to Military. | Leaders Concerned Over Rapid  
Sparking Allegations of Human | Growth of Villages in  
Rights Abuses in Affected Regions. Churachandpur.  
  
Demand for Autonomy Drug Trafficking and Crossborder Crime  
  
Nagas and Kukis Demand Greater Political Autonomy or | Manipur's Proximity to Golden Triangle and Porous  
Separate Administrative Units to Preserve Cultural Identities. Borders Increases Vulnerability to Drug Trafficking  
  
and Cross-Border Crime.  
  
Immediate Factors which triggered Manipur Violence  
  
Demand for Granting Scheduled Tribe (ST) Status to Meitei Community Has Persisted Since 2012. Meitei Tribe Union  
Petitions Manipur High Court, Seeking Recognition of Tribal Status Lost After 1949 Merger.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 24  
  
\
=== PAGE 27 ===
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Manipur High Court Direction  
  
Government Eviction Drive  
  
Manipur High Court Judge Directs State Government to  
Consider Meitei 's Request for ST Status in 2023. Kukis Fear  
Granting ST Status to Meiteis Will Allow Land Purchases in  
Prohibited Hilly Areas.  
  
Manipur Government Evicts 16 Kuki Households Over  
Forest Encroachment. Sparking Protests from Tribal  
Groups.  
  
Position of Hon'ble Chief Minister of Manipur  
  
Suspension of Operation Agreements  
  
Meitei Community Backs Chief Minister Biren Singh. While  
Kukis Demand Resignation, Sparking Law and Order Crisis in  
  
Manipur Government Withdraws from Suspension of  
Operations Agreement with Kuki National Army and  
  
Manipur.  
  
Zomi Revolutionary Army in March 2023.  
  
Ruling Party Views Chief Minister Biren Singh's Resignation or President's Rule as Admission of Government's Failure  
in Handling Crisis. President's Rule (Article 356) Imposed in Manipur as State Government Struggles to Control  
  
Violence and Lacks Public Confidence.  
  
President's Rule  
  
"Article 355" imposes a "Duty on Centre Government" to ensure  
that "Government of Every State" is carried on in accordance with  
"Provisions of the Constitution".  
  
It is this duty in performance of which "Centre takes over  
Government of a State" under "Article 356" in case of "Failure of  
Constitutional Machinery ina State".  
  
This is popularly known as "President's Rule" or “State  
Emergency”.  
  
Ground of Declaration  
  
“Article 356” empowers "President" to issue a proclamation if he is  
satisfied that a situation has arisen in which “Government ofa State  
cannot be carried on in accordance with Provisions of  
Constitution”.  
  
“Article 365” says that whenever a State fails to comply with or to  
give effect to Any Direction from Centre, it will be lawful for  
  
Manipur  
  
© Capital: Imphal  
  
i e Bordering States: Assam, Mizoram,  
  
Nagaland  
  
ie Bordering Nation: Myanmar  
  
© Governor: Ajay Bhalla  
¢ Last CM(12"): N. Biren Singh  
  
¢ CM with Longest Tenure: Okram Ibobi  
Singh i  
  
i ¢ CM with Shortest Tenure: Longjam  
: Thambou Singh  
  
e 1°CM: Mairembam Koireng Singh H  
i e 1" CM (After becoming State): Mohammed i  
i Alimuddin i  
  
President to hold that a situation has arisen in which Government of State cannot be carried on in accordance with Provisions  
  
of the Constitution.  
  
Parliamentary Approval and Duration  
  
Proclamation imposing President's Rule must be approved by "Both Houses  
  
of Parliament” within "2 months from date ofits issue".  
  
Ifapproved by Both Houses of Parliament, President's Rule continues for "6  
  
months".  
  
o Itcan be extended for a "Maximum Period of 3 years" with approval of  
  
Parliament, every 6 months.  
  
Consequences of President's Rule  
i e He can take up Functions of State |  
  
Government and Powers vested in }  
Governor or Any Other Executive  
Authority in State. i  
¢ He can declare that Powers of State i  
Legislature are to be exercised by i  
  
Parliament.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 25  
  
\
=== PAGE 28 ===
  
LAW PREP  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
e Every Resolution approving Proclamation of President's Rule or its  
  
Continuation can be passed by Either House of Parliament only by a. Scope of Judicial Review :  
"Simple Majority", that is, a Majority of Members of that House Present | e “38th Amendment Act of 1975” i  
and Voting. i made satisfaction of President in i  
  
invoking Article 356 “Final and  
Conclusive” which would “Not be i  
  
challenged in Any Court on Any i  
  
e Asper“44" Amendment Act of 1978”, Beyond 1 Year, President's Rule can  
be extended by 6 Months at a time only when following 2 Conditions are  
  
fulfilled: Ground”.  
  
1\. AProclamation of National Emergency should be in operation; and © But this provision was subsequently  
  
2\. Election Commission must certify that General Elections to i deleted by “44th Amendment Act of i  
Legislative Assembly of Concerned State cannot beheldonaccountof | 1978”. :  
  
difficulties.  
e Proclamation of President's Rule may be revoked by "President" at Any Time by a subsequent proclamation.  
o Such a proclamation does "Not require Parliamentary Approval".  
Key Facts related to President's Rule  
First 3 President's Rule: Punjab (1951), PEPSU (1953) and Andhra (1954).  
Most Number of President's Rule: Manipur (11), UP (10), J\&K (9), Punjab (8).  
  
Longest President's Rule in terms ofa Total Duration: J\&K \> Punjab \> Puducherry  
o Shortest President's Rule in terms of Total Duration: Uttarkhand  
  
States with Longest Single Period under President's Rule: J\&K  
  
States with Shortest Single Period under President's Rule: West Bengal, Bihar, Maharashtra  
  
S.R. Bommai vs Union of India 1994  
  
SC concluded that ‘Power of President to dismiss a State Government is Not Absolute”.  
  
President should exercise power “Only After his proclamation is approved by Both Houses of Parliament”.  
  
o Till then President can “Only Suspend Legislative Assembly” by suspending Provisions of Constitution  
  
relating to Legislative Assembly.  
  
Skill — up: United Nations Refugee Convention, UNHCR, Free Regime Movement,  
Citizenship Amendment Act 2019, 6" Schedule  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 26  
  
\
=== PAGE 29 ===
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
ll.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
Who was sworn in as the 13th Chief Minister of Manipur?  
(a) Okram Ibobi Singh (b) Yumnam Khemchand Singh  
(c) N. Biren Singh (d) Mairembam Koireng Singh  
  
Which constituency is represented by Deputy Chief Minister Losii Dikho?  
(a) Senapati Constituency (b) Mao Constituency  
  
(c) Imphal Constituency (d) Kangpokpi Constituency  
  
Under which Article can the President issue a proclamation if a state fails to comply with directions from the Centre?  
(a) Article 356 (b) Article 352 (c) Article 365 (d) Article 355  
  
What is the maximum period that President's Rule can be extended with repeated Parliamentary approval?  
(a) 5 years (b) 1 year (c) 6 months (d) 3 years  
  
Which Amendment Act deleted the provision that made the ‘satisfaction of the President' final and non-challengeable  
  
in court?  
(a) 42nd Amendment Act of 1976 (b) 38th Amendment Act of 1975  
(c) 1994 Amendment Act (d) 44th Amendment Act of 1978  
  
According to the Supreme Court's conclusion in the $.R. Bommai vs Union of India (1994) case, what action can the  
President take regarding the Legislative Assembly before Parliamentary approval?  
  
(a) Transfer legislative powers to the Governor (b) Immediately dissolve the Legislative Assembly  
  
(c) Appoint a new Legislative Assembly (d) Only suspend the Legislative Assembly  
  
Which state has experienced President's Rule the most number of times?  
(a) Manipur (b) Jammu & Kashmir —(c) Punjab (d) Uttar Pradesh  
  
Who was the first Chief Minister of Manipur after it officially became a State?  
(a) Mairembam Koireng Singh (b) Longjam Thambou Singh  
(c) Mohammed Alimuddin (d) N Biren Singh  
  
What type of majority is required for a resolution approving the proclamation of President's Rule in either House of  
Parliament?  
(a) Simple Majority (b) Absolute Majority (c) Two-thirds Majority (d) Special Majority  
  
One of the conditions for extending President's Rule beyond one year is the certification by which body that general  
elections cannot be held?  
(a) Election Commission —\_(b) President of India (c) Governor of the State (d) Supreme Court  
  
Which state has the shortest total duration of President's Rule across all instances?  
(a) Andhra (b) West Bengal (c) Bihar (d) Uttarakhand  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 27  
  
\
=== PAGE 30 ===
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_National News and Issues  
  
12\.  
  
13\.  
  
14\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Which two individuals were sworn in as Deputy Chief Ministers of Manipur alongside Yumnam Khemchand Singh?  
(a) Ajay Bhalla and N. Biren Singh  
  
(b) Nemcha Kipgen and Losii Dikho  
  
(c) Mohammed Alimuddin and Longjam Thambou Singh  
  
(d) Okram Ibobi Singh and Mairembam Koireng Singh  
  
Which of the following describes a consequence of President’s Rule regarding the legislative process?  
(a) The Governor assumes the power to create new laws independently.  
  
(b) The powers of the State Legislature are to be exercised by Parliament.  
  
(c) All existing state laws are automatically nullified.  
  
(d) The State Legislature is permanently dissolved by the President immediately.  
  
Which state has the distinction of having the longest single period under President's Rule?  
(a) Punjab (b) Uttar Pradesh (c) Jammu & Kashmir (d) Manipur  
  
What was the impact of the 44th Amendment Act of 1978 on the invocation of Article 356?  
(a) It introduced the requirement for a simple majority in Parliament.  
  
(b) It established that the President can only suspend the Legislative Assembly.  
  
(c) It made the satisfaction of the President final and non-challengeable.  
  
(d) It deleted the provision that barred judicial review of the President's satisfaction.  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 28  
  
\
