=== PAGE 65 ===
  
i os, February 2026  
  
\=, TOPIC  
in NEWS  
  
WORLD  
  
WETLANDS  
DAY 2026  
  
Why in News?  
World Wetlands Day observed on 2 February; with 2026 Theme “Wetlands and Traditional Knowledge: Celebrating  
Cultural Heritage”.  
India's Ramsar Network expanded as Union Environment Minister added Two New Wetlands, total reaches 98.  
Patna Bird Sanctuary in Uttar Pradesh's Etah District, established in 1991, recognised as State's Smallest Bird Sanctuary.  
  
Chhari— Dhand Wetland Reserve in Gujarat's Rann of Kutch famous for Mysterious Chir Batti Night Lights across Banni  
Grasslands.  
  
Wetland  
  
Place in which Land is covered by Water — Salt, Fresh or somewhere in between = either Seasonally or  
  
Permanently. i  
o Includes Water Bodies such as Lakes, Rivers, Underground Aquifers, Swamps, Wet Grasslands, Peatlands,  
Deltas, Tidal Flats, Mangroves, Coral Reefs and Other Coastal Areas as well. i  
  
Classified into 3 Segments: Inland Wetlands, Coastal Wetlands and Human—made Wetlands.  
  
Ramsar Convention  
  
e Convention on Wetlands of International Importance  
  
World Wetlands Day  
e Signed in 1971 in the Iranian city of Ramsar. ‘ Celebrated on 2" February, i  
o Came into force in 1975. commemorating 1971 Ramsar  
e Only International Treaty that addresses Specific Ecosystem i Convention on Wetlands of  
  
: International Importance.  
  
e Members: 172 States  
  
o India became a signatory to it on Feb 1, 1982.  
  
Extra Shots  
e AConference of Parties (COP) to Convention meets Every 3 Years. te Most Ramsar Sites are in }  
o In 2022, COP 14 was co — held in Wuhan (China) and Geneva i United Kingdom, Mexico, i  
(Switzerland). | India. i  
o Ramsar COP15 took place in 2025 in Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe. , ° Bolivia has Largest Area under |  
Convention Protection.  
  
Montreux Record  
Launched in 1990.  
  
Register of Wetland Sites where Changes in Ecological Character have Occurred or are Occurring or are likely  
  
to occur as a Result of Technological Developments, Pollution or Other Human Interference.  
Indian Wetlands in Montreux Record: Keoladeo National Park (Rajasthan) and Loktak Lake (Manipur).  
  
o-— Chilka lake (Odisha) was placed in the record but was later removed from it.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 63  
  
\
=== PAGE 66 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
Government Initiatives to Preserve Wetlands  
  
e Amrit Dharohar Capacity Building Scheme: Collaborative effort between "Ministry of Tourism" and "Ministry of  
Environment, Forest and Climate Change".  
o Aim: To encourage Optimal Use of Wetlands & enhance Biodiversity, Carbon Stock, Eco-Tourism Opportunities  
and Income Generation for Local Communities.  
o Primary Focus: To strategically transition from High — Volume Tourism to High — value Nature Tourism at  
Ecologically — Sensitive Wetlands.  
e National Wetland Conservation Program 1986: To conserve Wetlands in India & is implemented through State Wetland  
Authorities.  
e National Wetland Decadal Change Atlas: Prepared by Space Applications Center (SAC, ISRO). Original Atlas was  
released by SAC in 2011.  
  
e Nature — Culture Tourism Corridor: Indian Government announced a new Nature — Culture Tourism Corridor will be  
  
developed between Ayodhya and Devi Patan in UP.  
  
Wetland City Accreditation Program  
e = Partof Ramsar Convention.  
¢ = Approved at Urugauy in COP 12 of Ramsar Convention held in 2015.  
  
e Accreditation is granted to only those cities which satisfy All 6 International Criteria including Adopting  
Measures for Conservation of Wetlands and their Ecosystem Services.  
  
e = Aim: To promote Conservation and Wise Use of Urban and Peri— Urban Wetlands.  
e Validity: 6 years  
Highest from China (22), followed by  
  
Dear Lpt’ians  
  
We create most inventive, authentic and valuable material by putting in lot  
of time, effort, en y and money to make you successful and it would not  
be fair ifsomeone else get it by any unfair mean.  
  
And they will create competition for you without being the t of Law  
prep. To prevent this unfair activity, be vigilant and i  
  
ny form) it or teaching from it.  
  
ying or usage of Law Prep material is illegal and  
  
punishable-by imprisonment and fine under section 63 of the Indian  
right Act of 1957.  
  
e in touch for  
mpliments, at: 94141 43  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 64  
  
\
=== PAGE 67 ===
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
10\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www.lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
What is the designated theme for World Wetlands Day in 2026?  
  
(a) Wetlands and Traditional Knowledge: Celebrating Cultural Heritage  
(b) Wetlands and Climate Change: A Natural Solution  
  
(c) Wetlands for a Sustainable Urban Future  
  
(d) Wetlands and Biodiversity: Life in the Water  
  
In which Indian state is the Patna Bird Sanctuary, known as the state's smallest bird sanctuary, located?  
(a) Uttar Pradesh (b) Bihar (c) Rajasthan (d) Gujarat  
  
Following the addition of two new wetlands by the Union Environment Minister, what is the total number of Ramsar  
sites in India?  
(a) 100 (b) 75 (c) 92 (d) 98  
  
The Chhari — Dhand Wetland Reserve in Gujarat is famous for which of the following phenomena?  
(a) Chir Batti Night Lights (b) Bioluminescent Coastal Waves  
(c) Annual Flamingo Tornadoes (d) Floating Grass Islands  
  
According to the Ramsar Convention, which country has the largest total surface area under convention protection?  
(a) United Kingdom (b) Mexico (c) Bolivia (d) China  
  
Which of the following Indian wetlands is currently listed in the Montreux Record?  
(a) Chilka Lake (Odisha) (b) Wular Lake (Jammu and Kashmir)  
(c) Loktak Lake (Manipur) (d) Sunderbans (West Bengal)  
  
The Amrit Dharohar Capacity Building Scheme is a collaborative effort between the Ministry of Tourism and which  
other ministry?  
(a) Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
(b) Ministry of Rural Development  
  
(c) Ministry of Jal Shakti  
  
(d) Ministry of Earth Sciences  
  
For how long is the 'Wetland City Accreditation' valid once it is granted to a city?  
(a) 6 years (b) 5 years (c) 3 years (d) 10 years  
  
Which organisation prepared the National Wetland Decadal Change Atlas using satellite data?  
(a) Wildlife Institute of India (b) Space Applications Centre  
(c) Survey of India (d) National Remote Sensing Centre  
  
What is the primary objective of the 'Wetland City Accreditation Program"?  
(a) To increase the commercial value of urban real estate near lakes  
  
(b) To replace traditional sewage systems with natural swamps  
  
(c) To build a global network of man-made amusement parks  
  
(d) To promote conservation and wise use of urban and peri-urban wetlands  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 65  
  
\
=== PAGE 68 ===
  
Current Affairs February 2026\_Environment & Biodiversity  
  
ll.  
  
12\.  
  
14\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www\_lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Where was the 1971 Convention on Wetlands of International Importance signed?  
(a) Ramsar, Iran (b) Montevideo, Uruguay  
(c) Wuhan, China (d) Geneva, Switzerland  
  
Indian Government announced a new Nature — Culture Tourism Corridor to be developed between which two  
  
locations?  
(a) Patna and Etah (b) Ayodhya and Devi Patan  
(c) Keoladeo and Loktak (d) Rann of Kutch and Chilka  
  
Which of the following is a primary focus of the Amrit Dharohar scheme's tourism strategy?  
(a) Strategic transition from High-Volume Tourism to High-Value Nature Tourism  
  
(b) Replacing natural biodiversity with carbon-capturing artificial plants  
  
(c) Construction of high-rise hotels directly on wetland borders  
  
(d) Providing free transport for millions of tourists to all Ramsar sites  
  
How frequently does the Conference of Parties (COP) to the Ramsar Convention meet?  
(a) Every 2 years (b) Every 5 years (c) Every 3 years (d) Every year  
  
Which of the following best describes the Montreux Record?  
  
(a) An inventory of all coastal mangroves in the Southern Hemisphere  
  
(b) A list of the world's largest man-made reservoirs  
  
(c) A register of wetland sites where ecological changes are occurring due to human interference  
(d) A hall of fame for cities with the cleanest urban lakes  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLowUsSNow B@O@ 66  
  
\
