=== PAGE 16 ===
  
/..\\. December 2025  
  
\= TOPIC  
“inNEWS  
  
“  
7" \~ a)  
DISTRICT LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY.  
  
SEPPA, EAST KAMENG  
ARUNACHAL PRADESH  
  
4" NATIONAL  
LOK ADALAT  
  
Why in News?  
4" National Lok Adalat 2025 Resolves 2.59 Crore Disputes in One Day, Strengthening Lok Adalats as Key ADR  
Mechanism  
Lok Adalat  
e “Lok Adalat” means “People's Court,” based on Gandhian Principles, Offering Expeditious and Cost — Effective Alternative  
Dispute Resolution.  
¢ Lok Adalat is a "Forum" where "Cases or Disputes" which are "Pending ina \* Eason  
  
Court" or which are at "Pre — Litigation Stage" (Not yet brought before a I Lok Adalat" in India was  
  
organised in "Gujarat" in "1982".  
Statutory Status lee -e 22 - +--+ +--+ --------------\!  
  
Court) are "Compromised or Settled" in an amicable manner.  
  
e LokAdalat has been given "Statutory Status" under "Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987".  
  
e "Every Lok Adalat" organised for An Area shall consist of such number of "Serving or Retired Judicial Officers" and "Other  
Persons of the Area" as may be specified by agency organizing such Lok Adalat.  
  
o Generally, a Lok Adalat consists of a "Judicial Officer" as "Chairman" and a "Lawyer" (Advocate) and a "Social Worker"  
  
as “Members”.  
e Offences which are “Non—Compoundable” under Any Law fall “Outside Purview of Lok Adalat”.  
e Every Award made by a Lok Adalat shall be “Final” and “Binding” on All Parties to Dispute.  
e Organising Authority: National Legal Services Authority  
Type of Lok Adalat  
  
e National Lok Adalat: Held at Regular Intervals across India on a Single Day.  
o Since 2015, National Lok Adalat is being held ona specific matter every month.  
  
e Permanent Lok Adalat: In 2002, Legal Services Authorities Act 1987 was amended to permit for establishment of Permanent  
Lok Adalats to handle issues involving “Public Utility Services” such as Transportation, Telegraph, etc.  
o Chaired by a “District Judge” or “Additional District Judge” who is or has been a District Judge or has held a Judicial  
  
Office higher in rank than that of District Judge, as well as “Two Other Persons” with Adequate Experience in Public  
Utility Services.  
  
o Does ‘Not Have Jurisdiction” over “Any Situation” involving an “Offence that is Not Punishable by Law”.  
\= In"State of Punjab vs Jalour Singh" (2008), Supreme Court held that a Lok Adalat is "Purely Conciliatory".  
  
o Permanent Lok Adalat's Judgments are “Final” and “Binding” on all parties involved.  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 14  
  
\
=== PAGE 17 ===
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Current Affairs December 2025\_Polity and Governance  
  
History of Legal Aid Movement  
e 1980: National -—level Committee established to supervise Legal Aid Programs in India.  
o =©Named "CILAS" (Committee for Implementing Legal Aid Schemes).  
  
1 ¢ 1987: Legal Services Authorities Act enacted in India. ‘  
‘ o - Provided Statutory Base for Legal Aid Programs. ‘  
  
e 1995: Legal Services Authorities Act enforced on November 9, 1995.  
  
E —- Court  
  
e¢ Conceptualized on basis of “National Policy and Action Plan for Implementation of Information and Communication  
Technology (ICT) in Indian Judiciary 2005” submitted by “e — Committee, Supreme Court of India” with a vision to  
transform Indian Judiciary by ICT enablement of Courts.  
  
o Phase I: It was implemented during 2007-2015. Extra Shots  
  
oo. Phase II: Started in 2015 under which District & Subordinate Courts have e “Delhi” was “1" District — level  
  
e—Court”.  
e India's “1“ High Court e-Court”  
  
was opened at “Hyderabad”.  
e Funded by: Department of Justice (Ministry of Law and Justice) \_\_\_\_Was pence as ee\!  
  
been computerized.  
  
o Phase III: E—Courts Project Phase III spanning four years (2023 onwards).  
  
Swapnil Tripathi v Supreme Court of India (2018)  
e = Supreme Court has ruled in favour of opening up Apex Court through Live — Streaming.  
  
' e = Held that Live Streaming Proceedings is part of Right to Access Justice under Article 21. ‘  
¢ = “Gujarat High Court” has become “1" Court” to Live Stream Judicial Proceedings on YT Channel. ‘  
  
National Judicial Data Grid  
‘ e “National Repository of Data” relating to Cases Instituted, Pending and Disposed of by Courts across India. ;  
‘ e "Database of Orders, Judgments and Case Details" of 18735 District and Subordinate Courts, High Courts and  
' Supreme Court created as an "Online Platform" under "e— Courts Project". ‘  
e — Built under "Phase IT: e— Courts Project". ‘  
e Developed By: National Informatics Centre ‘  
  
e SUVAS stands for “Supreme Court Vidhik Anuvaad Software”.  
  
e = "Machine — assisted Translation Tool" trained by Artificial Intelligence.  
  
e To Promote & Ensure Participation of Regional Language in Judicial Proceeding.  
ASTER  
  
e FASTER stands for "Fast and Secured Transmission of Electronic Records".  
  
e "Digital Platform" to "Communicate Interim Orders, Stay Orders, Bail Orders etc. of SC to Authorities  
Concerned" through a "Secured Electronic Communication Channel".  
  
SUPACE  
e SUPACE is short for "Supreme Court Portal for Assistance in Court's Efficiency".  
e = Tool that "Collects Relevant Facts and Laws" & makes them "Available to a Judge".  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLlowusNow A@O@® 15  
  
\
=== PAGE 18 ===
  
Current Affairs December 2025\_Polity and Governance  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
National Legal Services Authority (NALSA)  
  
In 1987, "Legal Services Authorities Act" was enacted by "Parliament" which came; ------------------------------ :  
into force on 9" Nov 1995 to establish a "Nationwide Uniform Network" for providing Extra Shots  
  
"Free and Competent Legal Services" to "Weaker Sections of Society" on "Basis of  
Equal Opportunity".  
  
NALSA was founded in "1995" under "Legal Services Authorities Act 1987" to  
Monitor and Review Effectiveness of Legal Aid Programs & to develop Rules and  
  
"Article 39A" provides for "Free  
Legal Aid" to "Poor and Weaker  
Sections of Society" and ensures  
"Justice for All".  
  
Principles for providing Legal Services under Act.  
  
Legal Services Institutions at Various Levels  
  
e National Level: NALSA was constituted under Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.  
  
fe)  
  
Chief Justice of India is Patron—In—Chief.  
  
e State Level: State Legal Services Authority.  
  
fe)  
  
e District Level: District Legal Services Authority.  
  
fe}  
  
e Taluka/Sub-Division Level: Taluka/ Sub — Divisional Legal Services  
Committee.  
  
fe)  
  
e High Court: High Court Legal Services Committee  
  
e Su  
  
Headed by Chief Justice of State High Court who is its Patron—In—Chief. | F777 7000 '  
Objectives  
  
e Provide Free Legal Aid & Advice.  
  
e Spread Legal Awareness.  
  
© Organise Lok Adalats.  
  
e Promote Settlements of Disputes  
  
District Judge of District is its Ex— Officio Chairman.  
  
Headed by a Senior Civil Judge. through Alternative Dispute  
Resolution Mechanisms.  
e Provide Compensation to Victims of  
  
Crime.  
  
preme Court: Supreme Court Legal Services Committee  
  
— © 9 \_\_\_\_ = | QuIcKBYTE  
  
NEWS IN A MINUTE  
  
Polity & Governance  
e Union Cabinet approves CoalSETU Policy (Policy for Auction of Coal Linkage for Seamless, Efficient &  
Transparent Utilisation), Launching Long — Term Coal Linkage Auctions to Boost Transparency, Efficiency,  
  
and Resource Utilisation.  
  
e =Ponduru Khadi from Srikakulam (Andhra Pradesh) receives GI Tag for its Unique Heritage and Traditional  
Production Process.  
  
e AIIMS New Delhi conducts India's 1“ Clinical Trial of Supernova Stent, Advancing Indigenous Stroke  
Treatment Technology.  
  
¢ Operation Thunder 2025 seizes around 30,000 Live Animals globally in Major Crackdown on Wildlife  
Trafficking.  
  
e Maharashtra launches MahaCrimeOS AI to Combat Rising Cybercrime with Faster, Smarter AI — powered  
Investigations.  
o = MahaCrimeOS AI: Advanced AI Co — Pilot System developed with Microsoft using Azure OpenAI  
  
Service for Cybercrime Investigations. 66  
  
99  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 16  
  
\
=== PAGE 19 ===
  
Current Affairs December 2025\_Polity and Governance  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
PRACTICE QUESTIONS  
  
When and where was the first Lok Adalat in India organized?  
(a) 1982, Maharashtra (b) 1982, Gujarat (c) 1987, Delhi (d) 1995, Karnataka  
  
Under which Act does Lok Adalat have statutory recognition?  
(a) Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (b) Indian Penal Code, 1860  
(c) Constitution of India, Article 21 (d) Civil Procedure Code, 1908  
  
Which of the following is not within the purview of Lok Adalat?  
(a) Civil disputes pending in court (b) Pre-litigation disputes  
(c) Non-compoundable criminal offences (d) Family disputes  
  
Who typically chairs a Permanent Lok Adalat?  
(a) District Judge or Additional District Judge (b) Senior Civil Judge  
(c) High Court Judge (d) Retired Advocate  
  
Which Supreme Court case established that Lok Adalats are “purely conciliatory”?  
(a) Swapnil Tripathi v. Supreme Court of India (2018) (b) State of Punjab vs Jalour Singh (2008)  
(c) Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala (1973) (d) Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (1978)  
  
When was the Legal Services Authorities Act enforced in India?  
(a) 1987 (b) 1990 (c) 1995 (d) 2002  
  
Which was the first district-level e-Court in India?  
(a) Hyderabad (b) Delhi (c) Mumbai (d) Chennai  
  
What does SUVAS stand for?  
(a) Supreme Court Vidhik Anuvaad Software (b) Supreme Utility Virtual Assistance System  
(c) Secure Virtual Administrative Software (d) Supreme Court Verification and Analysis System  
  
What is the main purpose of SUPACE?  
(a) To provide free legal aid to poor citizens (b) To collect relevant facts and laws for judges  
(c) To secure electronic transmission of orders (d) To live-stream court proceedings  
  
Which High Court was the first to live-stream judicial proceedings?  
(a) Delhi High Court (b) Bombay High Court (c) Gujarat High Court — (d) Karnataka High Court  
  
Article 39A of the Constitution provides:  
(a) Right to speedy trial (b) Free legal aid to weaker sections  
(c) Right to privacy (d) Right to form associations  
  
Which authority organizes National Lok Adalats?  
(a) Supreme Court of India (b) National Legal Services Authority  
(c) District Judges (d) Ministry of Law and Justice  
  
Which body supervises legal aid programs at the national level before the Legal Services Authorities Act?  
(a) NALSA (b) CILAS  
(c) Ministry of Law and Justice (d) District Legal Services Authority  
  
www.lawpreptutorial.com | FoLLlowusNow A@O@® 17  
  
\
=== PAGE 20 ===
  
Current Affairs December 2025\_Polity and Governance  
  
19\.  
  
20\.  
  
4\.  
  
LAW PREP  
  
— Tutorial—  
www lawpreptutorial.com  
  
Permanent Lok Adalats deal primarily with disputes related to:  
(a) Criminal Offences (b) Public Utility Services  
(c) Property Inheritance (d) Family Law  
  
Which of the following is funding agency for the e-Courts project?  
(a) Supreme Court of India (b) National Legal Services Authority  
(c) Department of Justice, Ministry of Law and Justice (d) National Informatics Centre  
  
The database of orders, judgments, and case details of courts under e-Courts project is developed by:  
(a) Supreme Court of India (b) National Legal Services Authority  
(c) National Informatics Centre (d) Ministry of Law and Justice  
  
What does FASTER stand for in the Supreme Court context?  
(a) Fast and Secure Transmission of Electronic Records  
  
(b) Fast Access System for Tribunal Electronic Records  
  
(c) Fully Automated Secure Transmission of Evidence  
  
(d) Fast Automated System for Recording  
  
NALSA was founded in which year?  
(a) 1987 (b) 1995 (c) 2002 (d) 2005  
  
Who is the Patron-in-Chief of NALSA at the national level?  
(a) Union Minister of Law (b) Chief Justice of India  
(c) Attorney General of India (d) Secretary, Ministry of Law  
  
Which phase of the e-Courts project (2023 onwards) is currently operational?  
  
(a) Phase I (b) Phase II (c) Phase III (d) Phase IV  
— 86 y= J QUICKBYTE  
99 a: NEWS IN A MINUTE  
  
Polity & Governance  
  
e Ministry of Jal Shakti launches Sujalam Bharat App under Jal Jeevan Mission for Efficient Rural Drinking  
Water Management, developed with BISAG—N Support.  
  
o Sujalam Bharat App creates Digital Identity for Rural Water Schemes, Enabling Real — Time Monitoring  
and Management from Source to Household under Jal Jeevan Mission.  
  
e India to launch Bharat Taxi, 1“ Cooperative — Run Taxi Service by Sahakar Taxi Cooperative Limited, in  
Delhi from 2027.  
  
e Karnataka becomes 1" State to introduce dedicated law Karnataka Hate Speech and Hate Crimes  
(Prevention) Bill 2025 against Hate Speech and Hate Crimes.  
  
e India marks 30 Years of PESA \[Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996\] Act extending  
Panchayati Raj to Tribal 5" Schedule Areas (Article 244).  
o PESAActenacted in 1996 following Bhuria Committee (1995) Recommendations to Integrate Scheduled  
  
Areas into Decentralised Governance Framework.  
  
e Ministry of Law and Justice releases India's Constitution in Santhali, Marking 100 Years of Ol Chiki Script  
Creation by Pandit Raghunath Murmu.  
o Santhali Language included in 8" Schedule via 92™ Constitutional Amendment Act 2003. 66  
  
99  
  
S-20, Nandkishore Parikh Marg, Bapu Nagar, JAIPUR (M) 72400 60099 18  
  
\
